Metro
Menorah toppled at Maryland synagogue

Michelle Boorstein 
530 words
9 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Montgomery County police were investigating a report of vandalism Friday after a 9-foot metal menorah standing in front of a Jewish center, on a busy street, was knocked over on the first day of the Jewish holiday of Hanukkah.

Rabbi Bentzy Stolik told The Washington Post he started getting calls around 3:30 p.m. Thursday that the very visible menorah was on the ground, just outside Olney Village Center. The metal trunk appeared to have been pried off its metal base.

The incident comes at a time when reports of antisemitic and anti-Muslim acts and rhetoric are skyrocketing. Reports of hate crimes in general have been up since the mid-2010s, but since the Israel-Hamas conflict began in October the number of such reports has been rising steeply, Jewish and Muslim groups who track them say.

"There are more antisemitic incidents and they're more diverse. It's not just one swastika," said Ron Halber, executive director of the Jewish Community Relations Council of Greater Washington. "Now we get reports like that many times a week. It could be principals giving out inadequate guidance (about antisemitism) to students walking out to protest Israel. We've heard from several families of elementary school kids who had another child say: 'I don't want to sit next to you because you're Jewish.' This is becoming a living, breathing phenomenon we deal with every day."

Halber, whose group is a branch of a national organization, said that reports of antisemitism nationally have quadrupled since Oct. 7.

A man was taken into custody in Albany, N.Y., also Thursday afternoon, after firing a shotgun twice outside a synagogue and then saying "Free Palestine" as he was taken into custody, police said. No one was injured.

The Council on American-Islamic Relations, the country's largest Muslim advocacy group, said last month that requests for help and reported bias incidents in the month after Oct. 7 were up 216 percent over the same period in 2022.

Stolik said the support in the aftermath of the reported vandalism has been "inspiring."

Chabad, a worldwide Orthodox Jewish movement focused on broad outreach, opened in Olney a decade ago. It includes a synagogue as well as spaces for Jews of various ages and observance backgrounds to take classes and gather. It also sponsors a Hanukkah parade in Olney and a holiday event in the village center, as well as putting up the large electric menorah in front of its building.

Jews celebrate Hanukkah by lighting candles and exchanging gifts. The holiday marks an ancient military victory, when some Jewish radicals fought back against their Greek-Syrian oppressors. They rededicated the temple in Jerusalem, which had been defiled. The Jewish fighters, called Maccabees, were refusing, unlike other Jews of that era, to assimilate.

Stolik said people at Chabad quickly put the menorah back upright.

"With a lot of determination we put it right back up. It reminds me of the spirit of the Maccabees. For someone to desecrate a menorah, and then we get it right back up - that's exactly the story of Hanukkah."