Metro
Local Digest

347 words
3 March 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Police identify two NW shooting victims

Police have identified the victims of Wednesday night's fatal shootings in Northwest Washington, including one that sprayed bullets in a busy intersection lined with restaurants and apartment buildings.

Marvin Johnson Jr., 29, was killed when gunfire erupted about 9:30 p.m. in the 1400 block of V Street NW. Police said a 30-year-old woman, who happened to be walking on nearby 14th Street at the time, was struck in the leg but survived.

Bullets also struck five cars parked nearby and damaged two apartment units, according to a police report, terrifying residents and patrons of nearby restaurants and bars.

Earlier Wednesday, Rasheed Byles, 20, was killed in the 6400 block of Eighth Street NW - about four miles north of 14th and V streets.

Byles, of Southeast Washington, was fatally shot before 8 p.m.

Police have yet to make an arrest in either case.

- Emily Davies

and Clarence Williams

VIRGINIA

Man who fled after killing convicted again

A 28-year-old man who fled to Ethiopia after the killing of a young couple in Virginia was convicted a second time in connection with the December 2016 deaths, authorities announced Thursday.

Yohannes Nessibu was found guilty of voluntary manslaughter and use of a firearm in commission of a felony in the shooting of 22-year-old Henok Yohannes. He had previously been convicted of first-degree murder in the killing of 22-year-old Kedest Simeneh.

Family members of the victims had said previously that detectives told them that Nessibu had gone with a group to Yohannes's home to purchase drugs but that the deal went awry and Nessibu shot him. Nessibu then forced the people to drive to a Burke neighborhood where Simeneh was found shot, family members have said. After the killings, Nessibu fled to Ethiopia.

He was arrested and extradited in 2019, which an Ethiopian Embassy official said was possible because he was a U.S. citizen.

Sentencing for both convictions is set for June 16

- Omari Daniels