Metro
Staffer for Rand Paul is stabbed on H Street

Emily Davies 
598 words
29 March 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A staffer who works for Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) was stabbed Saturday evening by a man released from prison a day earlier in an apparently random attack on a busy commercial street in Northeast Washington, according to a statement from the senator and public records.

The staffer, who did not respond to requests for comment, suffered life-threatening injuries but was considered stable while awaiting surgery to address a punctured lung and potential internal and brain bleeding, charging documents show.

He works for Paul on the Senate Homeland Security Committee, according to the name on the police report, which matched the employee listed in the database of congressional salaries. The Washington Post does not generally name surviving crime victims without their consent.

"This past weekend a member of my staff was brutally attacked in broad daylight in Washington, D.C.," Paul said in the statement on Monday. "I ask you to join Kelley and me in praying for a speedy and complete recovery, and thanking the first responders, hospital staff, and police for their diligent actions."

The incident occurred about 5:15 p.m. in the 1300 block of H Street NE after the staffer and his friend left a nearby restaurant, according to police charging documents. The staffer told police in an interview from the hospital that he did not know the man who stabbed him or why he was attacked, according to the charging document.

Police on Saturday arrested 42-year-old Glynn Neal of Southeast Washington and charged him with assault with intent to kill in the incident, D.C. police said Monday. He was released from prison a day before the attack, according to the Federal Bureau of Prisons Inmate Locator.

Neal was convicted in 2011 of pandering, making threats to kidnap and other charges. Prosecutors alleged he asked a woman with whom he was romantically involved to "make some money by prostituting herself to strangers," then assaulted her when she declined his advances, according to charging documents. He was sentenced to more than 12 years behind bars, with five subsequent years of supervised release, court records show.

On Saturday, police identified Neal as the alleged attacker by using a cellphone found at the scene and calling a woman who turned out to be Neal's sister. After he was arrested, Neal told police that "a voice was telling him that someone was going to get him for all the things he [had] done. So [Neal] was waiting right there to get the someone," according to the charging document.

The attorney listed for Neal in court documents did not respond to a request for comment. Efforts to reach his family were not successful.

The attack came days before the House Oversight Committee's planned hearing Wednesday on crime and public safety in the nation's capital, which is expected to focus broadly on D.C.'s approach to reducing violent crime. In advance of the committee hearing, Chairman James Comer (R-Ky.) said that "radical left-wing policies have led to a crime crisis" in D.C. and vowed to "conduct oversight of the policies that have plagued our capital city."

As of Tuesday, homicides in D.C. were up 19 percent compared with the same period in 2022, a year when the city surpassed 200 killings for only the second time in about two decades. Property crime was also up - by about 27 percent year-over-year - while violent crime has remained steady compared with the same period last year.