Metro
Local Digest

395 words
18 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Man, 37, is killed in Northeast shooting

A man was found shot to death Friday morning in Northeast Washington. The fatal shooting occurred in the 600 block of Hamlin Street NE, D.C. police said. A department spokesperson said that just before 8:15 a.m. officers found a man who had been shot and was unconscious and not breathing.

Police later identified the victim as 37-year-old Marcus Vines of Northeast Washington.

-Emily Davies

Shooting in Southeast leaves man, 28, dead

A 28-year-old man died after a Saturday night shooting in Southeast Washington, police said.

Police responded to a report of gunshots around 8 p.m. in the 1200 block of 44th Street SE. They found one wounded man, who was taken to a hospital, police said.

The victim was identified as Kenneth Barksdale Jr., of Southeast. He died of his injuries at the hospital, according to D.C. police.

Police asked that anyone with information about the shooting call 202-727-9099. A reward of up to $25,000 is being offered to anyone who provides information that leads to an arrest and a conviction. Text messages can be submitted anonymously to the number 50411.

The District had recorded 259 homicides for the year as of Friday, a 34 percent increase over the corresponding period in 2022.

MARYLAND

Three pedestrians struck in hit-and-run

Police in Montgomery County are searching for a suspected hit-and-run driver whom they say struck three pedestrians, including a 79-year-old woman who was seriously injured, in downtown Rockville.

Walter Giovanni Marquez-Aviles, 44, remained at large Friday morning, said Andrea Escher, a spokeswoman for the Rockville Police Department. Marquez-Aviles and the victims apparently know each other, Escher said, adding that there was no ongoing threat to the general public.

Just after 2:30 p.m. Thursday, Rockville officers were called to the area of East Montgomery and Maryland avenues, an area of restaurants, courthouses and pedestrians. Police found three victims had been struck along East Maryland, but Marquez-Aviles had left in his dark-colored SUV, authorities said.

All three were taken to hospitals. One victim, an 18-year-old man, was seriously injured. The third victim, a 22-year-old, has been released from the hospital. Marquez-Aviles resides in Gaithersburg.

-Dan Morse