Metro
Alleged killer remains at large

Peter Hermann 
1,175 words
11 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

More than a month has passed since alleged killer Christopher P. Haynes escaped D.C. police custody in George Washington University Hospital and bolted outside, vanishing into the crowded streets. Officers, it turned out, had failed to properly handcuff him in the hospital. His disappearance sparked an immediate manhunt, putting residents on edge, shutting streets and forcing a university campus into lockdown. Authorities offered a $30,000 reward for information leading to his arrest.

That was early September. Now the calendar has turned to October, and Haynes, 30, is still on the loose.

Authorities have provided few details on the search for the fugitive, who is from Gainesville, Va. He is charged with fatally shooting an acquaintance and wounding another man in August on Kenilworth Avenue NE. The last substantial update officials provided on their efforts to find Haynes came three weeks ago at the end of an unrelated news conference.

Assistant D.C. Police Chief Carlos Heraud said last month that investigators "get information daily that we're following up on." He described the search, involving city police and members of the U.S. Marshals Capital Area Regional Fugitive Task Force, as "very active." He also warned that authorities believe Haynes "is not out there surviving on his own" and that charges could be filed against anyone who helped him flee or is harboring him.

Police have declined to comment on whether there have been any recent sightings of Haynes or where he might be. A D.C. police spokeswoman said investigators fear that releasing additional information could jeopardize the search.

A spokesman for the U.S. Marshals Service declined to comment. Police said he was arrested on the D.C. murder charge in Manassas, Va., and has ties to Stafford, Fauquier and Prince Williams counties in that state. They also said he frequented several areas of D.C.

The search for Haynes came amid two high-profile manhunts elsewhere - for a convicted killer in Pennsylvania, who was captured last month after spending nearly two weeks on the loose, and for a man suspected in a series of apparently random violent crimes in Baltimore.

That man, Jason Dean Billingsley, charged with killing the chief executive of a tech company and raping another woman, was arrested in Bowie, less than 20 miles outside the District. Baltimore's police commissioner had warned residents that Billingsley "will kill, and he will rape."

After Haynes escaped Sept.6, police put out a bulletin describing him as "armed and dangerous," although acting police chief Pamela A. Smith walked back that warning the following day. Smith told reporters that Haynes is considered dangerous because he is charged with murder, but police also said there was no indication he was armed in the hours after his escape.

Smith called that initial warning of him being armed a "miscommunication."

Police said the internal investigation into how Haynes escaped remained ongoing. Authorities said U.S. Marshals arrested Haynes on Sept.6 and transported him to the D.C. police homicide unit. At 2:30p.m., police said, Haynes complained of ankle pain.

Before he could be booked on the murder charge, police said, an officer drove him to George Washington University Hospital on 23rd Street NW, just south of K Street, near the university's campus in the Foggy Bottom and West End areas of the city.

Haynes escaped at 3:38p.m., police said, while officers were changing handcuffs in the emergency room. Smith said it appeared officers failed to secure Haynes to a gurney before removing one set of handcuffs. Smith said Haynes ran out of the hospital, eluding officers who chased him, with handcuffs attached to his right wrist.

Heavily armed police descended on the Foggy Bottom and Georgetown areas of the District, closed bridges and roads leading into Virginia, and flew helicopters over the neighborhoods. Students on George Washington University's campus were ordered to shelter in place, and police released a video that appeared to show Haynes - who police said has a Washington Nationals tattoo on his neck - in somebody's fenced-in yard.

One student described the ordeal as "an incredibly scary situation to be in."

Police lifted the shelter orders by 8p.m. that night and by the following day had cleared out of the D.C. neighborhoods. Police did not say whether they believed Haynes remained in the area.

Haynes has been charged in a warrant with first-degree murder while armed. Police say he fatally shot Brent Hayward, 33, on Aug.12 in front of a gas station and convenience store in the 1500 block of Kenilworth Avenue NE. Another man was also wounded in the shooting, and police said he survived.

The shooting occurred about 10:45p.m., and police said Hayward, shot in the head with a .40-caliber handgun, was pronounced dead at the scene. Police said they found a semiautomatic handgun on Hayward, loaded with 10 rounds of ammunition.

According to the arrest warrant filed in D.C. Superior Court, surveillance video shows what appears to be Haynes arguing with the man who was later wounded, as Hayward stood between them, apparently attempting to separate the two.

The argument continued, police said in the warrant, and at one point Haynes appeared to push, then punch the man who was eventually wounded. Police said the video shows Haynes return to his vehicle, then come back with "an object that appears to be a firearm in the front of his waistband."

Police said Haynes then punched Hayward and continued to argue with the other man. The warrant says Hayward took out his gun, held it by his side and backed away. Police said Haynes also backed away, got into a white Dodge Durango and drove away.

The video then shows Hayward and the other man sitting on a curb near the gas station's convenience store, police said. About seven minutes later, police said, the video shows a man matching Haynes's description walk back to the gas station. Police said the video shows him approach Hayward and other man from the back, and he "appears to shoot a firearm" in their direction.

Police said in the warrant that the wounded man told detectives he could not recall arguing with anyone. Police said they later found Haynes's white Dodge Durango in Virginia, which eventually led them to identify and arrest Haynes.

A person who told police he had recently sold Haynes the Dodge Durango said that Haynes, Hayward and the other man had been together in the vehicle, headed from Virginia to a concert in D.C. the night of the shooting and that a dispute broke out, possibly over something to do with the vehicle.

Efforts to reach members of Hayward's and Haynes's families were not successful. D.C. police said they reached out to the families of Hayward and the wounded man to tell them the suspect in the case had escaped.

Emily Davies contributed to this report.