Metro
'The city let me down': Mother mourns son

Emily Davies                Peter Hermann 
580 words
16 April 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C05
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

When her teenage son returned home after his latest attempt to run away, Tyshaune Young pulled up pictures on social media of kids killed by gun violence in the District.

"Don't make me one of those mothers," she told him, feeling, she said, like the only thing she had left to do was beg.

In the wee hours of Friday, Young's worst fear came true. Her son, 16-year-old Mylaki Young, was fatally shot while walking in the 200 block of V Street NW, near the LeDroit Park playground and dog park, police said. He became the fifth juvenile this year to be killed in the District.

A D.C. police spokesman said it appeared Mylaki was targeted when three men jumped from a dark-colored SUV, and at least one opened fire. Though police initially described the victim as a man, they later identified him as Mylaki. His mom, in a Friday interview with The Washington Post, said she had been worried that her son would be killed for over a year now - because he had been running away and getting into trouble - and had been asking the courts and the city for help.

Before that point, Mylaki was, in his mom's words, a "happy-go-lucky" kid - a "jokester, really respectful, open and outgoing." When he was in eighth great at Alice Deal Middle School, she said he volunteered to help out at a book fair. The oldest of four siblings, he was into anime and scarfing down macaroni-and-cheese and broccoli for dinner. Mylaki started high school at Jackson-Reed hoping to graduate into a career in football or IT, his mom said.

Some of those qualities remained - like his love for cheesy pasta - but the rest seemed to unravel when Mylaki met a new group of teenage boys, his mom said.

"My child wasn't my child no more when he started hanging with them," said Tyshaune Young, 33. "He became a different person."

He started to run away constantly, and Young said her son was arrested at one point last year, though she was uncertain of the charge. She said he was ultimately deemed a "person in need of supervision" by the city, a designation that made him more of a priority for D.C. police.

Young said her son spent a month in a group home before he was released in March on an ankle monitor. She said she pleaded at a court hearing for Mylaki to stay in the group home.

"My son is a good child, but right now, it seems like he's going through something ... Just keep him a little longer," she recalled saying in court.

Spokespeople for D.C. Superior Court did not respond to requests for comment Friday evening. Court records for juveniles in the District are confidential.

Young said the judge released Mylaki to her care. He stayed home for about two weeks, Young said. And then one day, he did not come home from school.

Mylaki was killed less than a month later.

"I wanted help, because I knew where this was heading," Young said, expressing frustration that the city did not put him in a facility or provide other intensive care. "The city let me down. Make sure you put that in the report. They let Ms. Young down."

Razzan Nakhlawi contributed to this report.