Metro
Local Digest

609 words
19 April 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Toddler slips through White House fence

A toddler on a visit to D.C. with his parents from Canada managed to slip through the White House fence and briefly enter the grounds Tuesday before he was scooped up by uniformed officers, the Secret Service said.

The incident - first reported by the Associated Press, which captured a photograph of the child being carried by police - occurred around 11 a.m., according to Lt. Paul Mayhair, a Secret Service spokesperson. Officials said that after the child squeezed through the fence on the north side of the White House, officers quickly retrieved him and reunited him with his parents.

Mayhair said the incident would not rank among the most unusual things he has seen in his 13-year career with the Secret Service. But the boy appears to be the first person to get past a new, taller fence installed outside the White House in recent years.

"The Secret Service Uniformed Division today encountered a curious young visitor along the White House north fence line who briefly entered White House grounds," the Secret Service said in a statement. "The White House security systems instantly triggered Secret Service officers and the toddler and parents were quickly reunited."

- Omari Daniels

MARYLAND

Man arrested in fatal stabbing, police say

Police in Montgomery County have arrested a D.C. man in a fatal stabbing after a dispute on a Metrobus in the Wheaton area on April 5, according to authorities.

Tyrone Joseph Curtis, 34, of Southwest Washington was charged with first-degree murder and was ordered held without bail after a court hearing Monday in Montgomery County District Court, according to police and online court records.

Curtis has been charged with fatally stabbing Amontae Robert Cunningham, 28, of Rockville. Court records show Curtis is being represented by the public defender's office. A spokeswoman for the Maryland Office of the Public Defender declined to comment on Tuesday.

According to charging documents filed in court, Curtis boarded the C2 bus en route to the Wheaton Metro station and sat near Cunningham. Police said the two men began to argue, then Curtis took out a knife. Police said the driver briefly calmed the argument but it started again, and the driver stopped the bus near University Boulevard West and Amherst Avenue.

Police said Cunningham got off the bus about 12:25 p.m. and Curtis followed and then stabbed Cunningham, they said.

The charging documents do not describe the argument. Authorities also did not say whether the men knew each other.

In a statement, police said they identified Curtis as a suspect on April 10 and arrested him Friday on University Boulevard.

- Peter Hermann

Police: Kids sickened by drug-laced edible

Three students at an elementary school in Rockville became sick Monday after they tasted what they thought was candy but was in fact an edible believed to have been laced with a "methamphetamine related drug," Montgomery County police said.

Police said that the 7-year-olds spit out the substance before ingesting it but that all of them soon felt dizzy. They sought help from a nurse at College Gardens Elementary School on Yale Place and were taken to a hospital for treatment, police said.

In a statement, police said the students found a container of "blue items" they believed were candy. Police said that they did not recover the substance but that based on tests, they believe the substance may have been Adderall or ecstasy, known as Molly.

In a letter to parents, the school's principal, Stacey Rogovoy, said the children found the "candy" on the playground.

- Peter Hermann