Metro
Local Digest

425 words
1 February 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Woman, 39, found slain in house in NE

A woman was found slain Monday in Northeast Washington, D.C. police said.

Lennette Clark, 39, was found about 8:20 a.m. in a house in the 1500 block of Anacostia Avenue NE after a report of an unconscious person, police said.

She was suffering from apparent trauma and died at the scene, police said. No further details were available.

- Martin Weil

Suspected police impersonator arrested

A man whom authorities said they suspect of impersonating a police officer was arrested near the Capitol with a stash of knives, U.S. Capitol Police said Tuesday.

Charges of impersonating a law enforcement officer and possession of a prohibited weapon within D.C. are pending against Max Eli Viner, 37, police said.

Efforts to reach an attorney for Viner or his relatives were not successful Tuesday.

In a news release, Capitol Police said an officer with the agency's Bicycle Response Team noticed a man who had been wanted for questioning by the U.S. Secret Service near the corner of Third Street and Madison Drive NW about 6:20 p.m. Monday.

Capitol Police searched the man and found multiple knives and a chain-saw blade on him, authorities said. Secret Service searched his Ford Explorer SUV and found fake police equipment, shell casings, a smoke grenade and a gas mask inside.

- Omari Daniels

MARYLAND

1 dead, 1 injured in Montgomery fire

One man is dead and a woman was in critical condition after a house fire in Montgomery County, the fire department said Tuesday.

The two, who apparently were suffering from smoke inhalation, were taken to hospitals after the blaze on Oriental Street, near Aspen Road in the Aspen Hill Park area, according to Pete Piringer, a spokesman for the county fire and rescue service.

The fire was reported about 11 p.m. Monday, and two people were rescued after they were found unconscious in an upstairs bedroom. Another resident was able to escape.

Piringer said an initial investigation found that the fire started in an electrical panel in the basement.

The damage was estimated to be about $225,000.

- Martin Weil

and Dana Hedgpeth

Driver killed in crash in Upper Marlboro

A motorist was killed Monday night in a single-vehicle crash in Prince George's County, police said.

The crash occurred about 8:50 p.m. in the 8000 block of Rosaryville Road in Upper Marlboro, police said.

The driver died at the scene, according to police.

- Martin Weil