Metro
Local Digest

564 words
3 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Man slain in Northeast Washington, police say

A man was fatally shot Friday evening in Northeast Washington, D.C. police said.

The man was found about 6:40 p.m. in the 900 block of Rhode Island Avenue NE, said Sgt. Adrian Channer, a D.C. police spokesman. He said police went there in response to a call about a shooting.

The victim was not identified, and no information about suspects or motive was immediately available.

The site is in the Brentwood area of Northeast, about three blocks east of the Rhode Island Avenue station on Metro's Red Line.

- Martin Weil

Student shot while walking to high school

A 17-year-old student walking to classes Friday morning was shot and wounded outside KIPP D.C. College Preparatory school in Northeast Washington, according to police and school officials.

Andre Wright, an assistant D.C. police chief overseeing the youth and family engagement bureau, said it appears the teenager was targeted in the 10:30 a.m. shooting.

Wright said the youth was struck once in the calf when as many as 14 shots were fired from inside a white, four-door sedan in the 1400 block of Brentwood Parkway NE.

Authorities said the youth ran across a track field toward a door to the school, where administrators helped him. No arrest has been made.

Tom Clark, a spokesman for KIPP, said classes at the school, near Gallaudet University, continued during the investigation but the campus was put into what the school calls "secure status," the equivalent of a lockdown. For a time, students were not allowed outside the building.

Later, Clark said school administrators canceled all after-school activities and told students to head directly home.

Wright said the school participates in "safe passage," an initiative in which people such as ex-security officers, parents or residents are stationed along specific routes to and from school to ensure students are safe. The student who was shot was headed to school after safe passage had ended. School starts at 8:30 a.m.

Another KIPP student was shot and wounded outside the school about 1:40 p.m. on May 22. That student also survived.

- Peter Hermann

MARYLAND

Woman fatally shot in Capitol Heights

A woman was killed late Friday in a shooting on Marlboro Pike in Capitol Heights, according to Prince George's County police.

Police did not immediately identify the woman, whom they said officers found with a gunshot wound at the scene close to Maryland's border with D.C.

The woman was taken to the hospital, where she later died, police said.

The shooting happened around 11 p.m. in the 4800 block of Marlboro Pike, police said, and no information on a suspect or motive was immediately available Saturday.

- Marissa J. Lang

Man found fatally shot in car in Pr. George's

A man was found fatally shot in a vehicle on Thursday, Prince George's police said.

Police said that at approximately 6 p.m., officers went to the 6000 block of Oxon Hill Road and found a man, whom police later identified as 47-year-old Neris Requeno Rodriguez of Temple Hills, with gunshot wounds inside a vehicle.

Rodriguez later died at a hospital, police said.

Police say they were working to determine a motive and identify a suspect.

- Omari Daniels