Metro
Property firm settles renter aid lawsuit

Marissa J. Lang 
725 words
13 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A management firm that administers leases and tenant applications in the District and buildings across the country has agreed in a settlement to evaluate its software and ensure none of its properties discriminate against renters who receive government housing subsidies - a practice that D.C. groups allege the company had previously engaged in.

The settlement agreement, announced Tuesday by the D.C. Office of the Attorney General, is the culmination of a lawsuit filed by the Equal Rights Center against the owners and managers of the Adams View Apartments, a Ward 3 apartment complex just north of Washington National Cathedral.

Low-income renters who receive government assistance are protected against discrimination in D.C. by several laws, including the District's fair housing legislation. That classifies "source of income" as a protected class, making it illegal for housing providers to discriminate against renters for paying with government-backed vouchers rather than money from their own checking accounts.

"It is illegal in the District of Columbia to discriminate against prospective tenants because they use housing vouchers," D.C. Attorney General Brian L. Schwalb (D) said in a news release Tuesday. "With affordable housing increasingly scarce across the city, my office will continue to vigorously enforce DC's anti-discrimination laws in order to bridge equity gaps that too often prevent all Washingtonians from having access to an affordable place to live."

Representatives for the defendants could not be reached for comment Tuesday.

Adams View Apartments, located in Cleveland Park, offers studio and one- and two-bedroom apartments for rent and, on its website, advertises "completely renovated" units with "some of the most beautiful and breathtaking views of the Washington, DC skyline."

About three years ago, according to the lawsuit, the Equal Rights Center was contacted by a D.C. government employee who said that she and a voucher holder had been told by building representatives that Adams View would not accept Section 8 subsidies at the property.

The building's managers have said the people who spoke to the government official and prospective tenant did so from a third-party call center, according to the complaint.

Earlier this year, the ERC filed suit against the owners and managers of the Adams View Apartments - Adams Investment Group, Adams-Cathedral LLC, the Barkan Management Company, Broadhouse Management Group LLC and Entrata, Inc. - alleging violations of the District's Human Rights Act and Consumer Protection Act. In its lawsuit, the ERC alleged that the building and its operators systematically refused to accept voucher-holders as tenants at the D.C. property.

Schwalb said the Equal Rights Center deserved "enormous credit" for initiating the case. A civil rights nonprofit, the ERC has sought to identify and file suit against housing providers who do not comply with these laws as part of its goal to "eliminate unlawful and unfair discriminations in housing, employment and public accommodations," according to the group's mission statement.

Defendants in the case have maintained that they did not engage in discriminatory practices and, according to the settlement agreement released Tuesday, agreed not to discriminate in the future against any prospective renters on any basis prohibited by federal or local law.

Entrata, which runs software that enables landlords and property managers to run more leasing processes digitally, agreed to review its practices in jurisdictions where source-of-income discrimination is prohibited - within and beyond the borders of the District - and encode in its internal operations and documents that vouchers are accepted at the properties it represents.

According to the settlement agreement, the company further agreed to "undertake a review of the current" operating documents to "ensure that [in no] state that Housing Choice Vouchers, Section 8 or other housing vouchers are not accepted."

The defendants also agreed to pay $235,000 to the ERC and the District "for restitution, damages, future training and compliance, attorney's fees, and civil penalties," the attorney general's office said.

Discrimination against voucher holders "keeps our communities segregated," ERC Executive Director Kate Scott said in a statement. "This agreement we are announcing today represents progress in our fight to make the process of finding a new home in the District more equitable, and I'm grateful to the Office of the Attorney General for their partnership in this effort."