Metro
Footage of police shooting is released

Emily Davies 
465 words
26 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

D.C. police have released body-cam footage from an officer who shot and wounded a man last week in the Chinatown area of Washington.

Police said the man, 27-year-old Corey Darnell Branch, was armed. He was arrested and charged with assaulting a police officer and drug and firearm possession. As of Monday, he was still hospitalized, according to court records.

In a letter to the chair of the D.C. Council's Public Safety and Judiciary Committee, Deputy Mayor of Public Safety and Justice Lindsey Appiah identified the officer who shot Branch as Leonardo Bell.

Neither Branch's attorney nor Bell responded to requests for comment Monday.

D.C. police said Dec. 19 that they had placed Bell on administrative leave. The department did not provide further information Monday about his status or how long he had been with the department.

The incident began about 8:30 p.m. on Dec. 18. A police affidavit filed in D.C. Superior Court said officers in a marked cruiser observed Branch walking on one side of the street. He "made adjustments to his waistband area; as if he were carrying and attempting to conceal a weapon," it said.

The police said that "due to the increase in armed robberies around the area," the officers drove closer to Branch and pulled up next to him. Still inside the car, the officers then asked Branch if he had a weapon, according to the affidavit.

At that point, police said Branch "took off running" away from the officers "while holding the object in the waistband area."

The body-cam video shows one officer, Bell, chasing Branch down a street. He shouted "put your hands up," then "put your hands down," the video shows. Bell pointed his firearm at Branch as he ran.

Branch appeared to trip, fall to the sidewalk and then get back up. At that point, Bell shouted "put your hands up" and fired a shot. In the affidavit, police said officers saw Branch "brandish a handgun from his waist" before "officers had to use force." It was unclear from the video whether he had a weapon.

The video shows Branch on the ground as officers handcuffed him. "Hey, excuse me, I'm bleeding," Branch said.

"Hey, nobody cares," one officer said. "Shut your mouth."

Officers provided medical aid until paramedics arrived, the police department said.

D.C. police said they recovered a handgun from the scene. At the end of the video, police can be seen pointing at what appears to be a weapon, saying, "The weapon is right there."

In the Chinatown area, police data shows, robberies are up 62 percent so far this year compared with the same period in 2022.