Metro
Police chief stands by not naming man in shooting

Emily Davies                Peter Hermann 
636 words
11 January 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

D.C. Police Chief Robert J. Contee III on Tuesday defended not immediately identifying the man who fatally shot a 13-year-old boy he claimed to have seen breaking into vehicles, and said any charges would probably be decided by a grand jury after the investigation is completed.

At a news conference meant to assuage growing anger and dispel rumors spreading on social media after the killing of Karon Blake early Saturday in Brookland, the chief said the shooter is African American and is not associated with law enforcement.

Three people familiar with the matter, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss a sensitive investigation, said the man is a D.C. government employee.

Karon, a student at Brookland Middle School, was shot shortly before 4 a.m. Saturday in the 1000 block of Quincy Street NE, in an incident in which police have released few precise details, including the name of the shooter. Authorities have said a man who lived on the street confronted Karon after he heard noises, then claimed to have seen the boy and possibly others breaking into vehicles. Police have said it appears two other people ran away. They have also said there is no indication Karon was armed, and Contee said Tuesday that they had not recovered a weapon from the youth.

The shooting has sparked a fiery debate among lawmakers and residents over crime and accountability, particularly involving the District's youth. At least two lawmakers have raised questions about why the shooter has not been charged, including newly elected D.C. Council member Zachary Parker (D-Ward 5), who represents the area where Karon was shot.

More than 200 people filled the gym at the Turkey Thicket Recreation Center Tuesday night for a community meeting on the incident, demanding details of the shooting and at times drowning out a police representative. Karon's grandfather, Sean Long, 55, told the crowd that if the victim had been White, the shooter would have been arrested by now.

"I didn't know you could get a gun permit and shoot somebody for messing with a car," Long said, urging all shootings and violence to stop.

Police have said they are consulting with prosecutors on whether criminal charges should be filed. The U.S. attorney's office said in a statement that it is "committed to thoroughly investigating this matter."

The chief said at the news conference that he "recognizes the community's desire in getting details of this incident," and he promised a thorough review into what he called a "tragic death of a son of our city."

Contee said identifying the man by name, customarily not done unless criminal charges are filed, would serve no purpose and could harm the investigation. He called social media posts that have purported to identify the shooter "reckless and dangerous."

"It's not about getting it fast but about getting it right," Contee said, adding, "This process takes time."

The founder of one activist group said they were researching property owners on Quincy Street in an attempt to learn the shooter's identity.

Contee declined to describe what the shooter told police about the interaction he had with Karon before he shot him.

He also would not say how many shots were fired or how many times Karon had been struck. A police report says Karon suffered multiple bullet wounds.

The chief said the man called 911 after he shot Karon and was administering CPR when police arrived. He said the man is among the roughly 34,000 District residents legally registered to possess a firearm in D.C. and one of the roughly 12,000 with concealed-carry permits.

Ellie Silverman contributed to this report.