Metro
Max, the senior dog stolen at gunpoint, is back home

Petula Dvorak 
889 words
25 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

As she braced for a third night without her beloved companion of 14 years, Zaleena Ahmed came across an image that chilled her.

It was a news report from 2022, showing masked bandits who got out of a car, showed a gun to someone walking a French bulldog on a spring night in D.C. and stole the pup.

"That broke my spirit," said Ahmed, who believes those were the same guys who pistol-whipped her and stole Max, her senior West Highland terrier, while they were out on their walk Saturday evening. "I was realizing this was probably a ring and they've been doing this a long time."

She stayed up until 4 a.m. scrolling through the tips, emails and support that were flooding her inbox.

At 10 a.m., she got the call she had been dreading.

"We have Max," the detective said, in dragnet deadpan.

His tone didn't sound like good news.

Earlier in the day, a D.C. resident named David Graham had been handing out fliers to tenants at the building where he works across from Kenilworth Park & Aquatic Gardens when he spotted something white across the street in the grass.

It was a dog, plodding along in a slow, senior gait.

"When [the dog] turned around and I saw the spot under his eye, I knew it was that dog in the news," Graham said.

Ahmed made fliers with Max's picture on them after she was attacked Saturday night.

It was something she never imagined would happen in dog-friendly D.C., which felt like a haven to her compared with New York, where she grew up.

When a masked and hooded man came up to her Saturday, she thought he was going to ask her for directions. Instead, he lifted his sweatshirt to show a gun.

They scuffled, and he hit her in the head with the gun at least twice, she said. When a dark-colored van pulled up, Ahmed said, she asked the driver for help.

"I yelled, 'Rape!' because I thought people would pay attention to that," she said. "Then I told the driver that I was being robbed." But the driver was in on it.

The men stuffed Max inside the van, Ahmed said. She remembers trying to grab a door handle, but the vehicle didn't have one. She thrust out her arm to grab Max, but the van sped off.

Most likely, the robbers who took Max from Ahmed realized that his sentimental value was more than his market value and set him free. He was found about six miles from home.

It wasn't the first time Max and Ahmed had been separated.

The last time was five years ago, when a downpour struck during a family road trip from New York to Florida for her uncle's funeral.

"The car flipped over. My mom was ejected and the car landed on her," Ahmed said. Ahmed was knocked unconscious, but Max's barking woke her up.

When she got to the hospital, they told her that her mom had died and Max had disappeared.

They posted his photo and information all over social media in South Carolina. Ahmed was reeling. Her uncle. Her mom. And then Max.

But the next day, someone spotted the bedraggled Westie trotting along Interstate 95. Rescuers used the dog's microchip to reunite him with Ahmed.

This time, the wandering Westie was a little slower as he turned to his rescuer and headed his way.

"The way he came to me, I knew it was him," said Graham, who is also from Queens, like Ahmed. He recognized Max from news reports, remembering that Ahmed had described the spot under one eye where he'd recently had surgery.

Graham brought the dog to police, and that's when the detective called Ahmed.

"It wasn't like a movie, with Max running to me," Ahmed said, after they were reunited at the 6th District police station. "I was the one who ran to him. And kissed him all over."

She brought his water bowl, food bowl, blanket, T-shirt (in case he was cold and wet) and an ice cream treat. Max was clearly exhausted but apparently uninjured.

The detective told Ahmed that the case isn't over. They recovered surveillance video of the incident and are following leads. Because the van may have been stolen, she's talking to the car theft division.

Ahmed said she remains an optimist, pointing to all the people who rushed in with support and tips, and to Graham for how gentle he was with Max. And she has a request.

"I want to pay it forward," she said.

Rashawn Williams, 31, is a nonverbal man with autism who has been missing since Friday, when he left his residential facility in Silver Spring and boarded a bus headed for Fort Totten, where Ahmed was attacked.

Williams's father, Jimmy Hall, posted a wrenching video in which he asks, through heaving sobs, for people to help find his son.

Ahmed said she hopes Williams gets the same level of support, energy and luck that Max did when he was lost.

Williams "deserves just as much attention," she said.