Metro
U.S. attorney in D.C. ups prosecutions

Keith L. Alexander 
939 words
20 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

The U.S. attorney's office in the District said Thursday that it prosecuted more cases in the fiscal year that just ended than it did in the previous year, an announcement that comes as the office and other parts of the D.C. criminal justice system are under criticism for rising crime in the nation's capital.

At a news conference, U.S. Attorney Matthew M. Graves said his office opted not to prosecute 56 percent of D.C. cases developed by law enforcement agencies in the fiscal year that ended Sept. 30. In the previous fiscal year, he said, the office declined to prosecute 67 percent of cases.

Graves said the biggest reason behind the increase is that the office is using the Drug Enforcement Administration and other federal agencies and private laboratories to process evidence in cases involving drugs, firearms and DNA.

Prosecutors in the office had been hampered in the past, Graves has said, because the D.C. Department of Forensic Sciences lost its accreditation in 2021, which left prosecutors scrambling to find outside agencies and labs to process certain evidence.

"We have had a 33 percent increase in charging rates," Graves, a Biden appointee, said in an interview. "We will continue to use every available tool in combating the violent crime crisis we are experiencing in our city."

House Republicans pressed D.C. officials at a congressional hearing last week about rising crime and urged harsher punishments for those convicted of violent offenses.

At that two-hour hearing on Capitol Hill, Lindsey Appiah, the District's deputy mayor of public safety and justice, acknowledged that crime in the nation's capital had become a "crisis."

D.C. Council Chairman Phil Mendelson (D) said the 56 percent "declination" figure was "not great."

Although he thinks "it's great that there has been an improvement over the past year," Mendelson said, "when I was head of the judicial oversight committee 15 years ago, it was much, much lower.

"The declination rate is an important statistic because it should cause questions that lead to answers that will improve law enforcement," he said. "The U.S. attorney's office has been on the defensive. But to me, it's less about pointing fingers and more about getting answers that will improve justice."

D.C. police officials have routinely criticized what they contend is a lack of accountability for repeat offenders fueling the violence. Prosecutors have argued that many arrests have lacked evidence strong enough to secure convictions.

But at Thursday's news conference, Graves said the biggest challenge was the lack of forensic labs to process evidence. He said that has been rectified with of federal labs and outside contractors.

To date this year, 224 people have been slain in the District, according to the latest police statistics. The total for all of last year was 166 homicides. Killings this year are on pace to reach the highest level since the late 1990s. Violent crime overall this year is up nearly 40 percent from last year, driven by a 68 percent spike in robberies.

Graves indicated that the percentage of violent crime prosecutions in D.C. Superior Court has increased slightly. Last year, his office prosecuted 90 percent of arrests made in homicides, armed carjackings, assaults with intent to kill, and first-degree sexual assaults. That is up from 87.9 percent during the previous year, but still lower than the 94 percent of violent cases the office prosecuted in 2018 and 2019.

"We are deeply committed to keeping our community safe," Graves said. "That's why we have charged thousands of cases. We are doing everything we can on the violent crime front."

In the last three months of the fiscal year that ended Sept. 30, Graves said, his office prosecuted 53 percent of arrests, and he said he believes that prosecutions will continue to rise in the current fiscal year.

Graves said several factors influence his office's decision not to prosecute some cases, including when victims in domestic violent cases choose not to cooperate in cases against their alleged abuser.

According to D.C. law, Graves said, when police are called to a scene for a domestic violence case, an arrest must be made. But Graves said the complainants often do not want the case to be prosecuted.

Another challenge, he said, is gun cases.

The D.C. Court of Appeals, Graves said, has changed how evidence is required to be collected in gun cases to avoid violating individual rights. He said that results in D.C. police officers having to be retrained in how they search for guns on individuals. He said that if prosecutors determine that the arrest may result in the case ultimately being dismissed by the appellate court because of how the weapon was found, they usually decide not to move ahead.

"We now need more evidence to go forward than we needed 10 years ago. So, there are some instances where we have to do some additional investigation. And there are new rules in what police can and cannot do," Graves said.

The District's U.S. attorney's office is the only such office that handles both local and federal cases. Graves said his office in the most recent fiscal year prosecuted 193 violent crime cases in federal court - including kidnappings, carjackings and felony firearm possession. That is up from 122 cases from a year earlier. That increase, Graves said, is attributed partly to an increase in staffing on the federal side of his office.