Metro
Man charged in May killing of girlfriend's toddler

Omari Daniels                Jasmine Hilton 
737 words
8 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C04
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A Prince George's man charged with murder in the killing of his girlfriend's 2-year-old daughter told police that he dropped her when he picked her up but denied wrongdoing, according to charging documents.

Kevin Robinson, 38, of District Heights was arrested Tuesday, Prince George's County police said. He faces charges of second-degree murder, child abuse resulting in death and related counts in the death of 2-year-old Nychelle Pettus in May.

Prince George's County District Court Judge Brian C. Denton ordered Robinson held without bond and permitted the option of home confinement during a bail review hearing Thursday. Denton imposed a 6 p.m. curfew in his ruling, saying Robinson can only be at home or the temp agency where he works. Denton, who noted that Robinson has no prior record, also ordered Robinson not to have any contact with children.

"Sadly, this is a mystery which may or may not be solved by forensics," Denton said in court. "What a sad and incredibly tragic case it is."

An attorney for Robinson maintained his innocence in court, and his family said it was an accident.

Prosecutors argued that Robinson was responsible for the child's death and should remain in jail. Robinson, who was in sole custody of Nychelle at the time of her injuries, including a skull fracture, did not contact police. Nychelle's mother called 911 when she came home from work and found her daughter "struggling for life," said Jessica Garth, chief of the special victims and family violence unit for the Prince George's County State's Attorney's Office.

"No one is willing to stand for this 2-year-old who lost her life," Garth said. "The defendant was entrusted to care for this little girl."

Police said that at approximately 10:50 p.m. on May 27, officers responded to an apartment in the 2100 block of County Road in the unincorporated section of District Heights.

Nychelle was found unresponsive inside the home. The toddler was pronounced dead at the scene.

Robinson told police that on May 27, Nychelle had not gone outside or suffered any recent falls or accidents, and no one else had been to the house, police said in the charging documents. She was "active, eating and playing normally" earlier that day, documents say Nychelle's mother indicated. Robinson told police that around 5:30 p.m. as he picked Nychelle up, "she fell from his arms onto the floor," where she "landed on her back causing her to cry briefly."

"He then put her in her crib for the night," police said in the charging documents.

Police learned that Robinson and Nychelle's mother reported to child protective services, but not police, that Robinson had dropped Nychelle on May 27, according to the charging documents.

Five other children living in the home have been removed, according to prosecutors.

A doctor from the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner said the explanation for the fall was "inconsistent with the injuries" that Nychelle suffered, according to charging documents.

Police said that on Sept. 29, the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner ruled the death a homicide and her cause of death was traumatic head injuries.

At the bond hearing, a woman who identified herself as Robinson's aunt called Nychelle's death "an accident" and asked the judge to give her nephew an opportunity to go back to his life.

"That's my nephew, too. I know he's not that person. He's in a whole predicament he's not accustomed to," the woman said. "We all know he didn't do this. He shouldn't have to sit inside of a jail."

Prince George's County State's Attorney Aisha Braveboy (D) said at a news conference following the judge's ruling that "while we disagree with the decision, we understand it."

"These cases are very complicated. Oftentimes individuals who don't have a prior record are accused of abusing children … and oftentimes their family members have no idea what their actions are, what they're capable of," Braveboy said. "What I saw was a family who believes in their family member."

"We have the facts, we have the evidence, and we have a medical finding that this child died by homicide," Braveboy continued.