Metro
D.C. to add 140 traffic cameras by spring

Luz Lazo 
1,098 words
29 November 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

The District has doubled its number of traffic cameras this fall, and officials say plans include adding another 140 devices before the end of March as part of a large-scale modernization and expansion of the city's automated traffic enforcement program.

The additional enforcement is the city's response to a rise in dangerous road behavior that, in recent years, has led to more deaths and serious injuries in the nation's capital. As the year comes to an end, D.C. is set to record a 16-year high in traffic fatalities.

The cameras have been the city's main method of traffic enforcement for years and can result in fines up to $500. District Department of Transportation officials say the cameras have been effective at deterring bad driving, although some data also indicates the most egregious behavior continues as drivers simply ignore citations and face few consequences.

Here's the latest on the new photo enforcement, locations where cameras are being deployed and an assessment of their effectiveness.

How many traffic cameras are out there?

As of last week, there were 337 cameras across the city's Automated Traffic Enforcement program. Of those, 140 were recently installed aboard Metrobuses to target violations by cars blocking buses within bus zones. Another 140 cameras target speeding violations.

In the past two months, the city more than doubled its number of cameras, adding the bus zone enforcement and 46 speed cameras. A smaller share of devices are deployed to enforce red lights and stop signs. More of those are expected to be activated in the coming months.

Where are the new cameras?

Traffic cameras are scattered around the District's eight wards, with many assigned to major routes. Many of the new devices this fall are being deployed to locations where data identified speeding as a big concern.

For example, the 46 speed cameras added since October are in corridors designated as part of a "High Injury Network," or areas with crashes leading to injuries or fatalities. Among those corridors are Benning Road NE, Georgia Avenue NW, New York Avenue NW and Southern Avenue SE.

The 140 cameras aboard Metrobuses started ticketing on Nov. 15 and target cars that are illegally parked, stopped or idling in bus zones. They are not yet ticketing drivers who block bus lanes outside of those zones.

Why are the bus cameras not targeting bus lanes?

Earlier this fall, D.C. said it was stepping back from a plan to issue $200 tickets to drivers who block bus lanes, citing concerns the fine is too high. In response, the D.C. Council this month approved legislation to reduce the fine to $100, bringing it in line with the penalty for parking at a bus stop. DDOT said in recent days it plans to begin enforcing bus lane rules in January.

The enforcement strategy, known as Clear Lanes, is a partnership between Metro and DDOT to reduce the number of vehicles blocking bus lanes and areas around bus stops. The city has 12.7 miles of bus lanes. Cars generally are allowed to enter bus lanes within 40 feet of an intersection or driveway to make a turn or to enter a parking space. Bus lanes are open to bikes, scooters, emergency vehicles and other transit vehicles.

Interim DDOT director Sharon Kershbaum said more than 23,000 warning notices were issued between July and the end of October, with nearly 80 percent of them for vehicles parked at a bus stop. She told the D.C. Council on Nov. 1 that the city will continue to give warning notices to people driving or parking in bus lanes until enforcement begins.

What are the fines?

Officials say there is a 30-day warning period after the cameras are installed. For speed cameras, DDOT issues fines that range from $100 to $500, based on the driver's speed.

For bus zone and bus lane violations, DDOT began issuing warnings in July. This month, the cameras started issuing tickets of $100 to vehicles at bus stops. The fine for bus lane infractions also will be $100.

The fine for passing a red light is $150, while the fine for not properly stopping at a stop sign is $100.

The city's traffic cameras issue thousands of tickets each year. But unlike those from police officers, tickets issued by cameras don't result in points on licenses.

Are more cameras coming this year?

The expansion of the city's Automated Traffic Enforcement program is expected to continue through the spring. An additional 140 cameras will go live by the end of March. Once those are added, the city will have 477 traffic cameras - more than three times the number it had at the beginning of this year.

The new cameras in coming months will monitor speeding, stop sign and red light violations.

How effective are traffic cameras?

A recent study of the District's camera program, commissioned by DDOT, found that across 21 studied locations, speeding decreased, injury crashes fell by 30 percentage points and the number of citations dropped by one-third after a year. Kershbaum said the study also found that about 70 percent of cited vehicles received only one citation, a signal to city officials that drivers learned their lesson after receiving a citation.

"Our cameras cite less than 1 percent of passing drivers, meaning that they have a 99 percent compliance rate," she said. "Put simply, DDOT's ATE cameras work."

But other data indicates gaps in enforcement and the presence of repeat offenders. About 3 million photo-issued tickets totaling $840.8 million in fines and penalties have not been paid to the District since 2000, The Washington Post found in a recent analysis of city records. That includes hundreds of thousands of dollars owed by motorists repeatedly caught violating traffic rules.

Data from the D.C. Department of Motor Vehicles highlights challenges facing the city in enforcing traffic regulations and holding drivers to account. For example, The Post found one car with Maryland tags that has 339 outstanding tickets worth $186,000 in fines and penalties.

One challenge is that most of the outstanding tickets - about 90 percent - are linked to vehicles registered outside D.C. The city doesn't have ticket reciprocity with other states, meaning it can't take action to collect those fines. The D.C. Council is considering legislation to improve the program's effectiveness, as well as other measures to target frequent offenders.