Metro
Local Digest

381 words
14 June 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Maryland man, 43, is fatally shot in SE

A Maryland man was killed Monday in Southeast, police said.

Joseph Crockett, 43, of Upper Marlboro was shot about 2:35 a.m. in the 300 block of Martin Luther King Jr. Avenue SE.

- Emily Davies

Man, 24, dies of injuries after shooting

A man was fatally shot in Southeast on Monday and an arrest was made, authorities said.

Maurice Robinson, 24, of Northeast , died Tuesday after being shot in the 2900 block of Southern Avenue, police said

David Pena , 46, of Southeast Washington has been charged with second-degree murder while armed, authorities said. Efforts to reach his family were unsuccessful, and an attorney was not listed in court records.

- Emily Davies

VIRGINIA

Police: Suspect kills himself after chase

A man who police allege abducted two people and shot and wounded someone in a rampage that extended from Fairfax County to Richmond killed himself after a police chase early Monday, authorities said.

Dana Paul Roman, 45, of Richmond was found dead of a "self-inflicted gunshot wound" after the chase, which ended in Richmond, authorities said.

According to both Henrico and Fairfax County police, Roman allegedly abducted someone in Henrico on Saturday and drove with that person to Fairfax.

At about 2 a.m. Sunday, Fairfax County officers went to the 12000 block of Thunder Chase Drive and found someone who had been shot, and another person, in a car nearby, with a stab wound to the arm and trauma to the face.

Police said they believe Roman had driven there from Henrico, left the car and began shooting. Both victims were known to Roman, police said. They are expected to survive their injuries.

As they investigated, police said, Roman abducted another person in the Reston area and forced that person to drive him back to Henrico County.

Henrico officials later found that person physically unharmed, police said. Fairfax County police said they got warrants to charge Roman with abduction by force, carjacking, two counts of felony firearm use, malicious wounding and assault.

Henrico police said they found Roman in Henrico early Monday. After chases, they said, he got to Richmond, where he shot himself. Officials said the officers did not fire their weapons.

- Olivia Diaz