Metro
Local Digest

614 words
18 January 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Driver charged in fatal crash in Northwest

A man from Philadelphia has been charged with driving under the influence and reckless driving following a collision in downtown Washington on Sunday that involved two vehicles and left a man dead, according to police and court documents.

The crash occurred about 6:10 p.m. at 15th Street and Massachusetts Avenue NW. Police said in court documents the driver of a Jeep Cherokee went through a red light and collided with an Uber whose driver was making a turn on a green light.

Police said the man who died, Carlos Enrique Christian, 24, of Northwest Washington, was a passenger in the Uber.

Authorities said the driver of the Jeep, Reginald Johnson, 30, was arrested after police said he failed a sobriety test administered after an officer smelled alcohol on his breath and reported he showed signs of impairment, according to a police arrest affidavit filed in D.C. Superior Court.

Johnson, who also was charged with operating a vehicle while impaired and aggravated reckless driving causing bodily harm, was released from custody Monday pending a court hearing scheduled for Feb. 6.

Johnson's attorney did not respond to a request for comment.

D.C. police said in a statement they had filed more serious felony charges against Johnson. A spokeswoman for the U.S. attorney's office said the case remains under investigation.

Attempts to reach Christian's family were not successful on Tuesday.

According to the court affidavit, Johnson was driving the Jeep east on Massachusetts Avenue and went through a red light as the Uber driver in a Toyota Corolla was turning left off a westbound lane of Massachusetts Avenue onto 15th Street. Police said the Uber driver had a green light.

The impact of the collision sent the Jeep into the side of a building, police said. Five other people were injured, including the Uber driver and a female passenger. Police said the others who were hurt were in the Jeep.

- Peter Hermann

and Alice Crites

VIRGINIA

Rouse to be sworn in after flipping seat

Aaron Rouse, a former National Football League player who runs a youth-focused nonprofit organization and served four years on the Virginia Beach City Council, will be sworn into the state Senate on Wednesday, after unofficial results were finalized in the special election to fill the Virginia Beach-based seat.

With the completed tabulation of provisional and post-election ballots on Tuesday afternoon, unofficial results showed Rouse narrowly defeating Republican Kevin Adams, a retired Navy lieutenant commander who runs a home-improvement business. The two men were competing for the swing-district seat vacated by Republican Jen A. Kiggans after she was elected to Congress in November.

Adams conceded the morning after Rouse, who held a narrow lead on election night, declared victory in the Jan. 10 election. The Virginia State Board of Elections is scheduled to certify results of the three special elections that were held that day, which included two races for state House seats, on Wednesday afternoon. Rouse will be sworn into the Senate immediately after.

The race between Rouse and Adams drew national attention and heavy funding for its potential impact on abortion access in Virginia. Rouse made abortion rights a focal point of his campaign, while Adams said he favored a proposal by Gov. Glenn Youngkin (R) to ban abortion after 15 weeks, with exceptions for rape and incest, and to protect the mother's life. In the closely divided Senate, Rouse's victory flips the seat and widens Democrats' majority to 22-18.

The General Assembly began its annual session last week in Richmond.

- Karina Elwood