Metro
Police say D.C. man fatally shot 13-year-old

Peter Hermann                Lori Aratani 
684 words
8 January 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A man fatally shot a 13-year-old boy early Saturday who he said he saw breaking into vehicles on a residential street in Northeast Washington's Brookland neighborhood, according to D.C. police.

The man, who authorities did not identify, was cooperating with investigators, said Dustin Sternbeck, a police department spokesman. Police identified the dead youth as Karon Blake of Northeast Washington. Efforts to reach his family on Saturday were not successful.

Sternbeck said there is "no indication at this time" if the youth was armed. He said detectives are working with prosecutors to determine whether criminal charges are warranted against the man who shot Karon. Police said Saturday they had only the man's account.

Police said the shooting, which occurred shortly before 4 a.m. in the 1000 block of Quincy Street NE, apparently occurred when the man confronted the youth after seeing several vehicles that had just been broken into along that street.

Details of that confrontation were not immediately available. Police said the man, whom they described as a homeowner, told them the youth who had been shot had been involved in the break-ins. It was not immediately known who called 911 or if one of the vehicles that had been broken into belonged to the man. Efforts to reach the man were not successful on Saturday.

Sternbeck said the man's firearm was legally registered and that he was administering CPR to the youth when police arrived at the scene.

Saturday's shooting comes amid a spike in violence involving and impacting youths across the District. Two teenagers under the age of 18 - including the 13-year-old - are among this year's first victims of deadly shootings in D.C. Last year in the city, 105 youths were shot, 16 of them fatally, nearly double the number of 2021.

Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) has called violence involving the District's young people an "emergency," and she organized a summit that is being held Wednesday to address the topic with public and charter school principals and other educators. Bowser, her deputy mayors for public safety and education, and the city schools chancellor will lead the sessions.

"We are deeply saddened by the senseless death of another child in our city," Lindsey Appiah, the acting deputy mayor for public safety and justice, said in a statement in response to Saturday's shooting. "Any loss of life is tragic, but when a child dies, we are all especially impacted."

Appiah, who had previously been chief of staff in the deputy mayor's office and spent nearly a decade working with youth offenders in the District, added, "We offer our sincerest condolences to the family coupled with our commitment to work together to utilize every resource to ensure that every resident of every age in every community across the District is safe, feels safe and is able to thrive."

D.C. Council member Zachary Parker (D-Ward 5), who represents the area, called the shooting a "devastating tragedy" and said in a statement he posted on Twitter that he is eager to address safety concerns raised by residents.

But he also said he has "deep concerns about neighbors taking justice into their own hands." Parker added: "Our young people deserve long lives with the opportunity to dream big. Healthy communities are safe communities, where we all work together to care for one another and invest in everyone's well-being."

The 1000 block of Quincy Street, near Michigan Avenue and across from the Brookland Middle School, consists of a private home and a condominium complex with at least three units from that building facing Quincy.

A neighbor pointed to a traffic cone along the street and said it was near the spot where broken glass and two vehicles had been before police towed them away.

Police said they also found a vehicle on Quincy Street that had been reported stolen and which they believe had been used by the 13-ye ar-old.