Metro
Local Digest

539 words
14 April 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Suspected carjacker dies, police say

A man who police said carjacked a vehicle at a gas station in Northeast Washington on Thursday was stabbed by a bystander who apparently tried to intervene, then crashed after driving away, and died, authorities said.

Police had said the woman who was carjacked was not harmed, but later said she had been beaten and suffered minor injuries. They said the person who stabbed the suspected carjacker fled and has not been located.

Detectives from the department's major crash and homicide units are investigating. Police said they did not know whether the man was killed by the crash or by a stab wound. An autopsy is scheduled.

The incident started about 11 a.m. when police said a man forced his way into a vehicle in the 1500 block of Kenilworth Avenue NE, which runs along D.C. 295 near the Maryland line. Police said the woman was sitting inside.

A police spokesman said at least two bystanders intervened and tried to stop the attack. The spokesman said one of those people stabbed the suspected carjacker during a melee.

Investigators said the suspected carjacker was armed with a metal baton. Police said he drove away and made it about a block before crashing at Kenilworth and Eastern avenues.

The circumstances of the crash and whether any other vehicles were involved were unknown.

Police did not identify the man.

- Peter Hermann

Police: Man fatally shot in McDonald's

A man was shot and killed Wednesday night inside a fast-food restaurant in Northeast Washington, D.C. police said.

Authorities identified the victim on Thursday as Andre Wallace Jr., 19, of Northeast. His grandmother, reached by phone, declined to comment.

The killing happened inside the McDonald's in the 1600 block of Benning Road sometime after 6 p.m., said Officer Hugh Carew, a police spokesman. The victim was pronounced dead at the scene.

Investigators did not reveal what may have led to the attack.

Officials described the assailant as a Black male with twists in his hair, who wore a white shirt and blue jeans with a black sweatshirt wrapped around his waist and was armed with a handgun.

- Clarence Williams

and Emily Davies

VIRGINIA

'Suspicious' bus tries to pick up students

Fairfax County police are investigating two incidents in which someone driving a "suspicious" bus attempted to pick up area students on Thursday.

The first incident occurred a little after 7:30 a.m., when a short white bus with a blue stripe tried to pick up a student at a bus stop near Southington Lane in the Reston area, police said.

The bus driver, who appeared to be male, shut the door and drove off when a member of the community attempted to speak with him, police said.

The second incident occurred close to 8 a.m., when an unmarked yellow school bus with black stripes tried to pick up elementary school students at a bus stop near Chynoweth Street and Telegraph Road in the Lorton area.

The incident occurred on the opposite end of the county from the first incident, police said.

The driver left when confronted by a community member, police said.

- Omari Daniels