Metro
Local Digest

378 words
21 January 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Police make arrests in two fatal shootings

D.C. police have made arrests in two separate fatal shootings, one in the Edgewood area of Northeast, and the other in the Navy Yard area of Southeast, according to authorities.

On Friday, police said they arrested Tyriq Williams, 31, of Northwest Washington, on a charge of first-degree murder in the Jan. 7 killing of Terry Clark, 20, of Southeast, in the 1200 block of Half Street SE.

Details were not immediately available.

Earlier this week, police said they arrested Rafeal Stevens, 38, of Southeast Washington, and Jermall Johnson, 39, of Northeast Washington, and charged each with first-degree murder in the shooting death of Aniekobo Macaulay Umoh, 50, of Brandywine, on Dec. 29 in the 2700 block of Seventh Street NE. Their attorneys did not immediately respond to requests for comment.

- Peter Hermann

VIRGINIA

Woman charged in car theft with child inside

A Virginia woman who allegedly drove off in a car with a 5-year-old girl in the back seat earlier this week was arrested Wednesday after the theft of another vehicle, Fairfax County police said.

Tanisha Hall, 40, of Alexandria, was charged with abduction, two counts of grand larceny, credit card theft, false identification and obstruction of justice, according to a news release.

Police said the 5-year-old was in a car whose driver left it in a parking lot in the 6200 block of Little River Turnpike, while he went to pick up food. The ignition was running, and when he returned the car and girl were gone, police said.

The child was found unharmed in the District. The car, a 2012 gray Honda Accord, remained missing.

About 6:50 p.m. Wednesday, police were told that an SUV was taken from the same block of Little River after the vehicle was briefly left with the ignition on.

The victim tracked the vehicle to South Bragg Street in Alexandria, where a woman was seen getting out of it, police said. Nearby, Fairfax County police said, they found the car that was stolen Sunday.

Hall was taken to the Fairfax County jail, where she was denied bail. An attorney for Hall was not listed in court records.

- Olivia Diaz