Metro
Accused in Md. killing had violent history

Jasmine Hilton                Fredrick Kunkle 
990 words
14 September 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A Prince George's County judge ordered the man arrested in the killing of Greenbelt teacher Mariame Toure Sylla to remain jailed pending trial Wednesday after prosecutors laid out more details in the woman's killing and pointed to additional criminal charges filed against the man in a separate domestic case.

"These are horrific facts," Prince George's County District Court Judge John Bielec said of charges detailed in the killing of Sylla, a beloved grade-school teacher who disappeared this summer before she was found decapitated by a pond, according to police. "There's absolutely nothing the court could structure that could protect the public."

The bond review comes nearly two weeks after county officials and police announced the arrest and first-degree murder charges against Harold Francis Landon III.

Sylla, 59, had been reported missing to Greenbelt police after last being seen on the night of July29. She regularly took evening walks in the area of Schrom Hills Park, police said. A weeks-long search by police, family, and students and teachers at the Dora Kennedy French Immersion School ended after police identified her remains, which investigators said were found dismembered miles away from the park in the Clinton area Aug.1.

A motive is still under investigation, according to prosecutors, and authorities have said Landon and Sylla did not know each other previously.

When police announced charges against Landon in Sylla's disappearance, he had already been in the county jail since Aug.1, on unrelated charges of assault and violating a protective order involving his ex-girlfriend, who is the mother of his son, according to court filings.

During Landon's bail review Wednesday, prosecutors also cited a 2019 case in which they said Landon was convicted of assaulting a woman in North Carolina he strangled.

In Sylla's case, Special Counsel to the State's Attorney Jonathon Church argued that Landon dumped Sylla's dismembered remains, which were later matched with DNA from her toothbrush to identify her, on July31.

A witness that day took a photo of Landon while seeing him wash his hands near a pond where Sylla was later found, according to prosecutors and charging documents. Landon later identified himself in the picture taken, and also his white Chevrolet truck, which was captured in surveillance footage near where her torso was found, prosecutors said. Phone records also place him in the area of the park the day Sylla went missing and in the area near the pond in Clinton where her remains were dumped, according to prosecutors.

Bre Jones, a public defender representing Landon, argued that the state lacked "hard evidence." Witnesses cannot identify Landon, she said, and the photo of Landon was taken at night behind a building. Landon also grew up in the area and frequently went fishing in the park, Jones said. She also argued that prosecutors couldn't confirm the truck seen belonged to Landon.

"There are plenty of older-model white Chevys," Jones said.

But according to charging documents, the truck caught on surveillance video used to discard Sylla's remains was the same vehicle he was seen operating in the unrelated domestic violence incident.

In the second case argued at Landon's bond hearing Wednesday, for which he was also held, State's Attorney Aisha Braveboy (D) said that Landon had assaulted and robbed his ex-girlfriend. According to charging documents, that incident occurred July31, hours before police say Sylla's body was dumped.

Landon's ex-girlfriend filed a protective order against him after she said he threatened to kill her, struck her and stole her phone along with $600 in cash, according to court documents and prosecutors. On Aug.1, he returned to the home after being sent away earlier that day by police and "began to get into a physical altercation" with a friend who was there with her, the charging documents said.

Authorities said in the charging documents that Landon "pulled out a knife and attempted to stab" his ex-girlfriend and her friend. They were able to "get the knife away from him and flee the scene." Police later found Landon at a hospital and arrested him.

Braveboy, who has entered her appearance in only a handful of cases and will prosecute the case along with Church, said being a part of seeking justice for Sylla was "personal."

"We're all human, you get connected to cases," Braveboy said. "Reading about her, learning about her, I felt strongly that I wanted to be a part, personally."

A beloved fixture of her community, Sylla's disappearance shook the city.

Hundreds of people attended her funeral held Friday at the Diyanet Center of America mosque in Lanham, including public officials, families of students and former students, and colleagues at the Dora Kennedy French Immersion School, as well as family from Sylla's native home of Ivory Coast and other members of the West African immigrant community.

"Whoever takes a life, it will be as if they kill all humanity," Ahmet Salih Bayraktar, the Islamic center's director, told the mourners, citing the Quran. "And whoever saves a life, it will be as if they save all humanity. Our community feels a deep sense of loss at your passing."

Sylla was Moira Iñigo-Cartagena's first teacher ever, and the memory that stays with her is their first-grade class sitting on the carpet singing songs with Sylla in French.

"She was really kind. I remember she was a little strict, but she really made me feel included because it was my first time," said Moira, 16, a Cheverly resident whose family speaks Spanish at home.

Moira attended a vigil while Sylla was missing, hoping for an outcome that wasn't to be.

"It really upset me how someone that amazing could pass away in such a horrible way," Moira said.