Metro
Local Digest

361 words
16 January 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

1 killed, 1 injured in shooting in Southeast

One man was killed and another was injured in a shooting early Sunday in Southeast Washington, according to D.C. police.

Police spokesperson Makhetha Watson said they were notified of shots fired in the 3200 block of 15th Place SE by ShotSpotter, a gunshot detection system, at 12:49 a.m. They arrived at the scene to find 34-year-old Renando Griffin and another man suffering from gunshot wounds. Both men were transported to hospitals, where Griffin later died.

Watson said no arrests have been made.

- Moriah Balingit

MARYLAND

Police: Woman's death probed as homicide

Prince George's County police are investigating the death of a woman whose body was found in Laurel late Saturday as a homicide.

Police were responding to a welfare check in the 9500 block of Muirkirk Road about 9:30 p.m. when they discovered the woman's body.

The woman, who was found outside, had "suffered trauma to the body" and was pronounced dead at the scene.

Police offered neither the name of the woman nor the nature of her injuries. They asked anyone with information to call 866-411-TIPS.

- Moriah Balingit

Pilot of stuck ship agrees to forgo license

The pilot aboard the Ever Forward when it ran aground in the Chesapeake Bay has agreed to give up his pilot's license and never apply for another, according to a recent document from the Maryland Board of Pilots.

The board, which licenses and regulates pilots serving the Port of Baltimore, agreed in exchange not to fine Steven Germac.

The Ever Forward, an approximately 1,100-foot container ship, got stuck March 13 after missing a turn in the Craighill Channel and plowing into shallow waters. It was later revealed that Germac was distracted by his cellphone.

Germac has not piloted a ship since the incident, and his license was suspended in October. In a settlement agreement and consent order signed Jan. 4 by Germac and Sandy Steeves, the chair of the Board of Pilots, Germac agreed to surrender his license and never reapply for one.

- Baltimore Sun