Metro
Local Digest

417 words
14 July 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Man shot in Northeast has died, police say

A man who was shot Tuesday in Northeast Washington's Eckington neighborhood has died, and his death is being investigated as a homicide, according to D.C. police.

Authorities said Elias Key, 55, of Northeast Washington died at a hospital Wednesday, a day after he was shot in the 1700 block of North Capitol Street NE. Police said the shooting occurred about 10:40 p.m.

No other details about the shooting have been released. Police said no arrest has been made.

There have been 130 homicides recorded in D.C. this year, a 17 percent increase over the same period in 2022.

- Peter Hermann

Construction worker slain at Howard

A construction worker was fatally shot during an attempted robbery Thursday morning at a work site on the campus of Howard University in Northwest Washington, D.C. police said.

The shooting occurred shortly after 6 a.m. near Sixth and W streets NW, police said in a statement. The location is a block east of Georgia Avenue near a nursing building and a library.

The victim, 34-year-old Rafael Adolfo Gomez, of Beltsville, Md., was working with the energy company ENGIE to build a new central utility plant on campus, according to a university statement. ENGIE, which contracts with Howard, did not immediately respond to requests for comment.

In a statement to the campus community, Howard University President Wayne A.I. Frederick described Gomez as "a husband, father, and friend."

Joshua Lopez, the vice chair of the Metro D.C. Hispanic Contractors Association, said Gomez was originally from El Salvador. Lopez said safety has been a worry in recent years for those working in construction or home improvement.

- Peter Hermann

MARYLAND

5 people shot outside restaurant, police say

Three women and two men were shot outside a restaurant in Silver Spring after an argument inside spilled into the parking lot, police said.

Montgomery County police spokeswoman Shiera Goff said officers responded about 12:15 a.m. after reports of people being shot behind Sole D'Italia Restaurant in the Norbeck-Layhill area.

Police found four victims with gunshot wounds, Goff said. Two suffered serious but non-life-threatening injuries and the other two minor injuries, Goff said.

Police said a fifth gunshot victim was transported by private automobile to a hospital and was treated for a minor injury.

Police said they are still investigating who was involved in the shooting.

- Omari Daniels