Metro
D.C. steps back from policing reforms as crime continues to rise

Peter Hermann                Emily Davies                Meagan Flynn                John D. Harden 
2,619 words
31 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

As homicides and carjackings mounted in 2023 and social media depicted the nation's capital as a hellscape, Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) and the D.C. Council turned away from progressive strategies meant to ease the footprint of law enforcement in the community and embraced measures that promoted more aggressive policing, prosecutions and detentions.

In changes both incremental and broad, Bowser, new Police Chief Pamela A. Smith and some lawmakers pushed for more accountability for adults and juveniles who shot people or stole vehicles at gunpoint, embracing the narrative that a lack of consequences emboldened criminals and contributed to driving the city's homicide count to its highest level in a quarter-century.

In all, 272 people in D.C. had been killed as of Thursday, up 35 percent from the same period in 2022. The District will finish the year with one of the highest per capita homicide rates among major U.S. cities.

Through Dec. 21, police said, 960 people in the city - 106 of them juveniles - had been shot, a 10 percent increase over the same period in 2022. In all, 19 people under age 18 were killed in 2023, including two infants. Sixteen were ages 13 to 17. Another was 10. Meanwhile, the arrest rate for homicides was just above 47 percent, the lowest in at least 16 years.

As a result, new laws enacted or still under debate appear more punitive, largely washing away or diluting many of the reforms enacted after the 2020 police murder of George Floyd in Minneapolis. The changes would hand new powers to judges to expand pretrial detention for adults and youths, enhance penalties for gun-related crimes, revive the anti-loitering and drug-free zones of the early 1990s crack era, and empower police to randomly search people charged with violent offenses who are on pretrial release. New curfew enforcement began and restrictions on police vehicular pursuits were eased. Meanwhile, prosecutors started charging more juvenile criminal suspects as adults.

Bowser, in an interview with The Washington Post, made no apologies for her efforts to "rebalance" progressive changes made to policing during the coronavirus pandemic and after the nationwide protests following Floyd's murder. She described some of those changes, which affect policing and the broader administration of public safety, as "unnecessary and reactionary," and said they had led to the "complete destruction of that [criminal justice] ecosystem."

"The pendulum is swinging back to the middle," Bowser said.

With 40 killings per 100,000 residents in 2023, the District's homicide rate was higher than in all but four of the nation's 60 largest cities, surpassing Detroit and Oakland, Calif., among others. Only New Orleans, Cleveland, Baltimore and Memphis were worse. While the number of killings rose in D.C., they declined in many other cities, including New York and Chicago.

David Muhammad, executive director of the National Institute for Criminal Justice Reform, said the public is telling lawmakers that "they want more consequences, more accountability. I think policy people hear that and think more punitive measures."

Muhammad, who is working with the District on its gun violence reduction plan and has served as an adviser on crime in several cities, said that "there is no question there are several processes in the criminal justice system in D.C. that need fixing." He said that "swift and certain, but not severe" sanctions for serious criminal behavior are needed.

D.C. Attorney General Brian L. Schwalb, whose office prosecutes juvenile cases, said there are times when young people should be held to adult standards in criminal matters. But in general, he said, doing so "does not make us safer as a community. … There is too much focus on policing and on punishment and not enough focus on prevention."

Schwalb said his office is handling more serious cases involving juveniles than in years past. But he said the solution to the crime spike won't come from law enforcement.

"We see a hopelessness, oftentimes, in young people that can be attributed to the fact that our system has failed them so many times before, they end up being brought to my … prosecutors," the attorney general said. "We are asking the criminal justice system to respond to everything because we don't have confidence in the other systems, and that is assbackwards. We can't keep pushing people into the criminal justice system because our educational system, our health-care system, our housing system, our mental health infrastructure, our economic infrastructures are not doing what they are supposed to do."

Bowser said her administration has made great strides in improving education, family assistance and child welfare, and she disputed critics who contend that the policing changes threaten a return to the mass arrests and incarceration seen during the drug wars of the late 1980s and early '90s. In those days, she said, it meant locking up addicts who are now viewed more as victims.

Today, Bowser said: "We're talking about people with guns who have shown they are willing to use them. … I'm on the same page as Washingtonians. People just want to go about their lives and be safe and they do not want to be confronted by people with guns."

D.C. police said that as of Wednesday, they had seized 3,148 illegal firearms, compared with about 3,100 in 2022 and 2,300 in 2021.

The debate over crime in D.C. reached the halls of Congress and will continue in the new year, with a focus on the city's criminal justice system that in most ways lacks local control. Judges, prosecutors, prisons and the supervision of defendants before and after trials all come under the umbrella of the federal government.

In 2023, the spike in homicides pitted officials against one another as they tried to shift blame for the unyielding violence. The mayor pointed to judges and prosecutors for leaving some violent offenders out of jail. The city's top prosecutor, U.S. Attorney Matthew M. Graves, said D.C.'s overall criminal justice system "is not sufficient to meet the moment." Schwalb criticized police for closing too few carjacking cases. And a judge slammed the District's youth services agency for not effectively holding and treating young people.

Carjackings, totaling 951 through Wednesday, soared 102 percent compared with the same period in 2022, and a significant number of them involved juveniles. In May, a 12-year-old boy was charged in nine separate carjackings, robberies and assaults. A 15-year-old girl died in a crash connected to a carjacking. And one motorist, an off-duty federal security officer, fatally shot a 13-year-old boy during what he said was an attempted carjacking. Authorities say a majority of carjackings are never solved, usually because it's hard to match a person found driving a stolen vehicle to the person who took it forcibly.

At the same time, D.C. police have been coping with a personnel shortage. The department has lost more than 500 officers since 2018, which the Bowser administration partly blames on a hiring freeze resulting from budget cuts in 2020. Council members have disputed that. Still, as 2023 draws to a close, the police force, with about 3,200 officers, is at a half-century low in staffing. Bowser has said the city should have 4,000 officers.

The system seems broken to mothers such as Charice Harkum, whose son, Tyejuan Harkum, 24, was fatally shot in early December on Naylor Road SE while running errands that included getting a haircut and picking up a money order to help her pay rent.

"I am worried about safety in D.C.," said Harkum, 40, who thinks the killing occurred during a random robbery. Police have not commented on a possible motive.

She described her son as artistic with music, a high school graduate who was studying forensic science in college and took a break from his studies to help care for his 3-year-old daughter. She said he doted on the girl, taking her to movies, Chuck E. Cheese, amusement parks and beaches. He is survived by two brothers, ages 9 and 14.

"D.C. is so dangerous, the detectives and the police, they can't keep up with the violence," Harkum said.

Council members spent much of the year under scrutiny for their responses to the crime spike. Bipartisan congressional rebukes of the council's 2022 revised criminal code and the final version of its 2020 policing accountability bill put the local legislative body in a national spotlight, with Council Chairman Phil Mendelson (D) inflaming the situation during a congressional hearing in March when he rejected the idea that D.C. was experiencing a "crime crisis."

The council also challenged Bowser to turn a mirror on her administration, questioning whether she and police leadership were thinking creatively enough to develop strategies that would be more effective than legislation in reducing violence. Mendelson questioned whether some of the mayor's proposals directly affected violent crime, such as reviving anti-loitering drug-free zones.

"The mayor has planted the seed in a lot of people's minds that the council needs to pass legislation," said Mendelson, who has frequently argued that the primary focus should be on solving more criminal cases and prosecuting them more aggressively. "I do think that there is legislation that would improve the law or the ability of the police. But it's not as critical as these proven strategies that [D.C. police] and prosecutors can do, that don't require changing the law."

On Dec. 21, Mendelson introduced legislation that would direct the mayor and D.C. police to implement new strategies that were already within their power, such as a gun violence intervention strategy and focusing on blighted properties that are magnets for crime. The ideas came from a gun violence reduction strategic plan that was developed for the city by national criminal justice experts in May 2022, but was never fully implemented.

That 2022 report had faulted D.C. for not developing a cohesive strategy to reduce gun violence. In a Dec. 20 interview, council member Brooke Pinto (D-Ward 2) said she agreed that the city still did not have such a plan, despite finishing this year with the highest annual homicide toll since 1997.

"When we do things in a piecemeal fashion, without that coordinated strategy and vision, we are not going to get the outcomes that we need to see," said Pinto, chairwoman of the council's committee on the judiciary and public safety.

One hurdle is that Linda Harllee Harper, 57, who was director of Bowser's Office of Gun Violence Prevention and also led the Office of Neighborhood Safety and Engagement, died unexpectedly May 26. Those two offices have been merged, yet the mayor has not appointed a permanent leader. "We are recruiting" to fill the position, she said Wednesday.

Pinto said she hoped a firmer vision and better implementation of gun violence reduction strategies would come to fruition once Bowser fills that critical position. But Pinto said she was clear-eyed about the role the council should play in reducing crime: identifying shortcomings in the city's "legislative environment." As examples, she cited the loosening of restrictions on vehicular pursuits, which police said had hampered their ability to catch carjackers, and expanding pretrial detention for adults and juveniles accused of committing violent offenses, after the U.S. attorney raised concerns that too many such defendants were being released.

That move was part of the council's most significant action on crime this year: the Prioritizing Public Safety emergency legislation that passed in July. While Pinto and officials in the Bowser administration said they think the legislation played a role in reducing crime in the second half of the year, Pinto acknowledged that it is difficult to ascertain.

After the law change took effect, the city's Department of Youth Rehabilitation Services started running out of bed space for detaining juveniles. But there was almost no difference in the rate of pretrial detention for adults charged with felonies from August to November compared with the rate over the same period in 2022. In fact, it was slightly lower in recent months compared with the same time last year, according to the D.C. Pretrial Services Agency.

Council members are turning their attention to other critical breakdowns in the system that they see as exacerbating the crime-and-justice problem. Multiple proposals, for example, would enhance staffing and transparency at the District's troubled 911 call center. And Mendelson wants police to hire qualified civilians to investigate property crimes and cold cases, freeing more officers for other duties.

Pinto said she is particularly concerned about a lack of effective pretrial supervision and a perception that there are no consequences for violating release conditions, such as ditching a GPS monitor. One of her proposals, backed by the U.S. attorney, would allow police to search people without a warrant if they have been charged with or convicted of a violent crime and released under supervision. This has prompted concerns from criminal justice advocates that Pinto is moving in a more punitive direction, repeating long-ago mistakes that led to mass incarceration and aggravated tensions between residents and police.

Bowser praised the council for largely supporting her efforts on the crime front, and she pointed to successes in other areas that can influence crime, such as placing youngsters in structured counseling sessions after they have been suspended or expelled from school.

Police also are setting up a "real-time crime center" in which city and suburban officers and federal agents will monitor an expanded, regionwide surveillance camera system 24 hours a day. And Smith, the police chief, said she plans to start a program in which qualified civilians would answer some non-emergency calls, such as parking complaints or traffic issues, to free uniformed officers for more pressing tasks.

Smith also said the department is starting to turn the tide on staffing, noting that the academy class that started in December had 24 members, more than in several years. She also said the pace of officers who are retiring or quitting has unexpectedly slowed, and attrition is now at a break-even point.

Graves, the U.S. attorney whose office handles most adult criminal matters in the District, drew criticism after the Substack "DC Crime Facts" reported that the office had declined to prosecute about two-thirds of people arrested in D.C. in fiscal 2022. Later last year, Graves said the figure had improved to 56 percent. He has expressed frustration over court decisions that restrict police actions and make prosecutions in gun cases difficult. He also has cited drug testing at the city's crime lab, which lost certification for two years until this month.

Graves also said D.C. laws have been too lenient.

"From our perspective as prosecutors, the message that the system is sending … is that illegal firearms possession isn't that big of a deal," Graves said in an interview. "We prosecute in the context of the rules that D.C. creates. You have to look at that system."

Graves said even people who are arrested but not prosecuted continue to be investigated to secure additional evidence. He said his office obtained more homicide indictments in 2023 than in any of the previous 12 years.

"I understand the urgency of the situation," he said. "We're doing everything we can from our lane to influence the overall trends."