Metro
Frederick sheriff steps aside after plea of not guilty

Dan Morse 
359 words
13 April 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

BALTIMORE - Frederick County Sheriff Chuck Jenkins will take a leave of absence, a move announced one week after he was indicted in an alleged scheme to illegally secure machine guns that were rented out to customers at a local gun range.

News of the leave of absence was released the same day Jenkins appeared in U.S. District Court in Baltimore and pleaded not guilty to all counts against him. He was allowed to remain released pending trial. He was also ordered to surrender his firearms - a condition that is not unusual for those facing federal charges.

In a statement released by the sheriff's office, he said he was taking the leave "out of respect for the men and women of this agency and not to interfere with the effective operations."

"I have full confidence in the system, and I know that my innocence will prevail at the end of all of this and that I will be found not guilty," the statement added.

Jenkins has lead the Frederick County Sheriff's Office since 2006 and was charged with conspiracy and making false statements to acquire the machine guns, prosecutors with the U.S. attorney's office in Maryland announced last week.

Robert Justin Krop, owner of the Machine Gun Nest in Frederick, faces the same charges. Krop, who also was charged with unlawful possession of machine guns, is expected to appear in court Thursday. Krop could not be reached for comment, and online federal court records on Wednesday afternoon did not list an attorney for him.

Prosecutors say Jenkins, 66, and Krop, 36, coordinated to use letterhead from the Frederick County Sheriff's Office to request machine guns for the agency to review for possible purchase. Investigators allege in court documents, however, that Krop had asked Jenkins to submit the letters so that the weapons could later be rented to customers.

Col. David Benjamin, the chief deputy sheriff who has worked for the agency for nearly 40 years, will lead the office, a news release stated. Benjamin has been chief deputy since 2006.