Metro
Local Digest

614 words
23 April 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

7 men, 1 girl wounded in 2 shootings in SE

Eight people were wounded Friday night in Southeast Washington in two shootings that police said may be connected. Their injuries did not appear to be life-threatening, according to police.

Seven men were shot about 10 p.m. near Fifth and Lebaum streets SE, said Assistant Police Chief Andre Wright. He said a 12-year-old girl was struck twice in the lower extremities in the 2900 block of Second Street SE.

Police said both shootings could be connected but did not explain their thinking. No motive was known in either case.

The large number of victims in the Lebaum Street shooting was attributed to a variety of factors, including the warm weather on a Friday night, which brought people outdoors. It was not known if any of those hit had been targeted. Lebaum is a tree-lined residential street in the Congress Heights area.

- Martin Weil and Clarence Williams

Man killed in shooting in SE neighborhood

A man was fatally shot early Friday in the Fairlawn neighborhood of Southeast Washington, according to D.C. police.

The shooting occurred about 12:10 a.m. in the 1500 block of 19th Street SE. Police said officers responding to a call found the victim suffering from several gunshot wounds.

Police identified the man as Dajuan Blakney, 32, of Southeast Washington. He was pronounced dead at the scene.

- Peter Hermann

Library event to target post-prison challenges

The D.C. Public Library will host a town hall Monday to address challenges people released from prison face when returning to society.

The National Second Chance Town Hall will be held at the Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial Library at 901 G St. NW. The free, two-hour event begins with an opening reception at 5:30 p.m.

The seminar is co-sponsored by the REFORM Alliance, a nonprofit criminal justice reform group, and will address housing, employment, mental health and education challenges faced by individuals following their release from prison.

Scheduled speakers include Tony Lewis Jr., a reentry advocate whose father, Tony Lewis Sr., was released from prison last month after more than 30 years in prison for drug-related offenses. The elder Lewis, organizers say, is also scheduled to attend.

Other speakers include Jessica Jackson, national criminal justice reform advocate; Topeka K. Sam, founder of Ladies of Hope Ministries; and David Safavian, general counsel for the American Conservative and director of the ACU Foundation's Nolan Center for Justice.

Registration for the town hall is required.

- Keith L. Alexander

VIRGINIA

Woman dead, 2 hurt in crash on Route 50

One person was killed and two were hurt early Friday in a crash along Route 50 in Northern Virginia, officials said.

Christina Hamilton, 37, died in the crash about 1 a.m. on Arlington Boulevard near Patrick Henry Drive, Fairfax County police said Friday in a news release.

Authorities said Hamilton was inside a 2018 Honda Civic that was going eastbound in the far-right lane. The Civic attempted to make "an abrupt U-turn" and was struck by an eastbound 2016 Honda Accord in the far-left lane, police said.

Officials said Hamilton was taken to the hospital, where she was pronounced dead.

The two passengers in the Accord were also taken to a hospital, although their injuries were not considered to be life-threatening, police said.

Detectives said they are investigating whether Hamilton was the Civic's driver or a passenger. Police said a witness had reported a man running from the crash scene.

Police said speed and alcohol were not factors for the Accord's driver.

- Olivia Diaz