Metro
Suspected drunk driver hits state trooper's SUV

Dan Morse 
335 words
23 May 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B02
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A suspected drunk driver slammed into the back of a marked Maryland state trooper car early Monday morning in a crash that hospitalized both men, officials said.

The trooper was seated inside his parked SUV along the Capital Beltway near University Boulevard East in Montgomery County, helping with traffic control at a construction zone. He had emergency lights activated. The zone was also marked by a large, flashing yellow arrow, according to officials, and big orange barrels.

"I don't know what more we could have done to warn drivers," said Elena Russo, a spokeswoman for the Maryland State Police. "He didn't heed all the signals that this was a construction zone."

The trooper and motorist were both released from the hospital later on Monday, she said.

About 4:30 a.m. Monday, troopers, local police and medics were called about the wreck. They determined that a 31-year-old Washington. D.C., man, struck the trooper's vehicle from behind while driving a white Mercedes SUV. The driver was taken to Suburban Hospital, officials said. The trooper was taken by ambulance to the Maryland Shock Trauma Center in Baltimore.

Based on initial findings, the driver was suspected of being impaired, possibly speeding, and not mindful of construction zone hazards.

"It was sort of a recipe for disaster," Russo said.

Any charges against the driver, she said, are pending the final outcome of the investigation and a review with the Montgomery State's Attorney's Office.

For now, the driver's general actions seemed to have gone squarely against the messages of construction zone safety so often made by highway and police officials.

"It's so important to slow down and stay alert to ensure the safety of all those who are working in and around these construction zones," said Russo.

The collision caused major traffic backups on the Beltway as several lanes were closed.

Dana Hedgpeth contributed to this report.