Metro
Ex-officer gets 32 years in child sex abuse case

Keith L. Alexander 
545 words
12 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B04
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A former D.C. police officer was sentenced to 32 years in prison Monday for sexually assaulting the 9-year-old daughter of his former girlfriend while he was a member of the force.

Charles Johnson II, 30, was convicted of 13 crimes related to the sex assaults, including first-degree child sexual abuse. Prosecutors said the abuse occurred over two years in the Southeast Washington home he shared with his then-girlfriend. The victim was 9 several years ago when the abuse began, authorities said.

Johnson and his family repeatedly denied the allegations, arguing that his former girlfriend persuaded her daughter to make up the assault allegations in retaliation for Johnson breaking up with her and marrying another woman.

Johnson, who joined the force in 2018, was officially terminated in November, a police spokesman said.

At the sentencing in D.C. Superior Court, the child sat on the front row of the courtroom as her mother told Judge Michael O'Keefe about repeated "harassment and stalking" by people who she believes are Johnson's supporters. She said she and her daughter are now in therapy.

"This has impacted us in the most horrendous way," she said.

O'Keefe called the case a "horrendous crime" and said children "are our most vulnerable people in society."

During the five-day trial in July, prosecutors presented no eyewitnesses or DNA evidence. But the girl, who was 12 at the time of the trial, took the witness stand. Wearing shoulder-length braids and wiping away tears, she described the abuse she said she suffered at the hands of the man she called "Dad" and "C.J." Johnson, she said, often took her shopping and cooked with her in the kitchen.

The girl's mother testified that she learned of the assaults months after Johnson moved out of their apartment, when she walked in on her daughter as she appeared to be trying to attempt suicide. The mother then recorded her daughter telling her about the assaults. That recording was also played for the jury.

Assistant U.S. Attorney Kathleen Houck said the girl was "more brave than anyone could ever ask her to be."

"At 9 years old, she had to experience something no child or adult should ever experience," Houck said.

Johnson did not speak about the case at the sentencing, at the urging of his attorneys while they file an appeal. Instead, Johnson thanked his family, many of whom - including his wife, parents, brother and grandmother - were in the audience.

At trial, Johnson's attorneys Steven Kiersh and Megan Allburn attacked the mother's credibility and motives.

Johnson's father, Charles Johnson Jr., spoke of his son wanting to follow him into law enforcement. The elder Johnson, another son and other family members were also D.C. police officers. Johnson said "one of my greatest joys" was working a D.C. shooting case with his son when his son was newly out of the police academy.

Outside of the courtroom after the sentencing, Johnson's mother, Lisa Johnson, said her son was innocent of the allegations. "She made all of this up just to get back at him," she said.