Metro
Teen in shooting of Commanders player has absconded, judge says

Keith L. Alexander 
356 words
6 April 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A teenager who pleaded guilty in connection with the shooting of Washington Commanders running back Brian Robinson Jr. did not show up for a sentencing hearing Wednesday and is being sought by youth services officials, a judge said.

D.C. Superior Court Judge Robert A. Salerno said the teen - whom he had ordered to remain in his parents' home with GPS monitoring while he was awaiting sentencing - had absconded. The youth, 17 at the time of his arrest, had pleaded guilty in January to assault with a dangerous weapon and carrying a pistol without a license as part of a deal in which prosecutors agreed to ask that the teen be placed in the custody of the city's youth services until he turns 20. A younger teen also pleaded guilty in the incident and was ordered to remain in youth services custody until he turns 21.

Police have said previously that the two teens tried to rob Robinson as he was leaving a store on H Street NE just before 6 p.m. on Aug. 28 and that Robinson ran away. The 17-year-old chased the athlete, and Robinson grabbed him and wrestled the gun out of his hands, authorities said.

At that point, the other teen fired his weapon. Robinson was struck twice. One of the bullets hit just above Robinson's knee, the other in his hip area. They missed major ligaments and bone, and the running back played this past season.

The Washington Post generally does not name those charged with crimes as juveniles, and was allowed to attend the hearing on the condition that the youth's identity not be revealed.

At Wednesday's hearing, Bryan W. Brown, an attorney for the teen, did not say where his client was or how the teen absconded. Brown said the teen's mother - who participated in the hearing virtually - had requested her son be placed in the Psychiatric Institute of Washington.

Salerno said that request would be revisited once the teen "is picked up or surrenders."