Metro
Family mourns man slain at Howard

Heidi Pérez-Moreno                Peter Hermann                Emily Davies 
1,035 words
15 July 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

There was something restorative about construction to Rafael Adolfo Gomez, a way to put his hands to work while he made a living in the United States, his brother said.

Gomez grew up on a farm in Usulután, El Salvador, and the work in the D.C. area reminded him of rebuilding and renovating houses for friends and loved ones back home, or even of the time he had spent irrigating fields and harvesting corn.

"The minute he came here, he said that he wanted to work in construction" Rafael's brother, Jose Gomez, said in an interview in Spanish. "It's what he liked most - and where he found the most jobs here."

On Thursday morning, D.C. police said, someone fatally shot Gomez during a robbery attempt as he arrived at one of those job sites - helping build a new energy-efficient utility plant on the campus of Howard University in Northwest Washington. No arrest had been made as of Friday afternoon.

The shooting at 6 a.m. near Sixth and W streets NW, a block east of Georgia Avenue and near buildings devoted to medical studies, elicited grief on a campus quieted by the summer break.

It was the second killing in eight days to occur during an apparent random robbery on a college campus in the District. A Kentucky teacher visiting for an education conference was fatally shot on the grounds of Catholic University on July 5; police arrested a suspect on Tuesday.

For more than a month, the District has been confronting a violent crime surge without a permanent police chief or interim replacements in two offices crucial to addressing violence. As of Thursday, D.C. police data shows homicides up 18 percent and robberies up 54 percent compared with the same time last year. On Tuesday, the D.C. Council passed emergency public safety legislation establishing a new crime for firing a gun in public and making it easier to detain some people as they await trial.

The killing at Howard reverberated through the District's Latino community and among those working in construction or home improvement in the region, frequent targets of robberies. Four such workers have been killed in the District since 2017, three in robberies. Last year, D.C. police arrested a man who they said was responsible for daylight robberies at 20 construction sites that victimized about 40 workers, many of them immigrants.

"Construction, development is an economic backbone for this city, and if construction workers are getting murdered and have to constantly worry about robbery, that is an issue that will come up down the line," said Joshua Lopez, the vice chair of the Metro D.C. Hispanic Contractors Association. "The city really needs to take this issue seriously."

In November, 59-year-old Abdulio Arias-Lopez was killed and dismembered in the basement and backyard of a home he had come to paint in Northeast Washington. In 2020, 48-year-old Elias Flores was fatally shot while installing a staircase in a Northeast home. And three years earlier, 34-year-old Balmore Mauricio Fuentes was shot in the alley behind his renovation project, which was a two-story rowhouse in Northeast. Arrests were made in all three cases.

In testimony before the city council last month, Lopez said he had worked with D.C. police's Latino Liaison Unit to check in on job sites across the city but stressed that "they are a small unit and can only cover but so much ground." He urged the District to pass legislation that would stiffen penalties for some gun crimes.

D.C. officer Jose Gonzalez-Tirado, a member of the department's Latino Liaison Unit, said he and others started visiting construction sites in January to deliver safety tips, such as to always stay in pairs even if going to a truck to retrieve a tool.

He said Latino construction workers are particularly vulnerable because most carry cash and some are hesitant to enlist help from police because they might be worried about immigration issues.

Gonzalez-Tirado said D.C. police do not inquire about immigration issues. When he heard about the shooting at Howard, he said, "It hit me hard. I'm Latino. I'm a part of the community. I wish I could have been there to help him at that moment."

D.C. police Cmdr. James Boteler, who heads the third district station, said officers in the LeDroit Park neighborhood rushed to the scene early Monday and found the wounded victim on a sidewalk. Boteler said Gomez died at a hospital. "We believe preliminarily this is a potential robbery that went bad," Boteler said.

Police said they were looking for a white Nissan SUV with Maryland plates 5EW6340 last seen heading south on Georgia Avenue.

Gomez came to the United States a decade ago. He lived with his brother and both their wives in a rented house in Beltsville, Md.

Gomez had been working with the energy company ENGIE. In statement, officials said they were "deeply saddened by the senseless act of violence." They said Lopez had been one of the company's subcontractors.

Jose Gomez said that when his brother came to the United States, he dedicated himself to construction work, adding that his favorite jobs were ones he picked up in D.C.

Those jobs also allowed him to work on high-rise buildings and apartment complexes - projects he liked because he could get his hands dirty with concrete or waterproofing surfaces. Outside work, Jose Gomez recalled passing time with his brother watching television and playing soccer at nearby parks.

Jose Gomez said he treasured watching Real Madrid soccer games on the couch with Rafael on weekends, recalling that his brother would jump from his chair when the team scored a goal and groan when they missed. The home feels empty now, Jose Gomez said.

He also laments the dreams his brother left behind. Rafael Adolfo Gomez had hoped to build his parents a home back in Usulután and financially support them. "He wanted to make sure they were okay," his brother said.