Metro
5 convicted of murder in 2018 shooting of 10-year-old girl in D.C.

Keith L. Alexander                Omari Daniels 
930 words
14 June 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A jury in D.C. Superior Court on Tuesday convicted six men of a variety of crimes, including first-degree murder and conspiracy, in connection with the 2018 fatal shooting of 10-year-old Makiyah Wilson as she stood with her older sister near an ice cream truck in Northeast Washington.

The verdict after a three-month trial was mostly a win for prosecutors, as the jury agreed that most of those charged were responsible for the most serious offenses. One defendant, though, was found not guilty of firstdegree murder.

The killing has long troubled D.C. officials, and Makiyah's face became a symbol of the human toll of gun violence on city streets.

Homicide detectives arrested 11 people affiliated with a neighborhood crew and charged nine of them with the shooting. Six were defendants during this trial: Quentin Michals, 25; Qujuan Thomas, 24; Isaiah Murchison, 23; Darrise Jeffers, 23; Gregory Taylor, 27; and Marquell Cobbs, 21.

Michals, Thomas, Murchison, Jeffers and Taylor, who all are from Southeast Washington, were found guilty of first-degree murder and face up to life in prison. Cobbs, of Clinton, Md., was acquitted of that charge but found guilty of a lesser, conspiracy charge. He faces up to five years in prison.

Jurors began their deliberations May 25, but actual discussions lasted only about seven days. The men will be sentenced in October. Another trial for remaining defendants is scheduled for next year.

It was a challenging case for federal prosecutors. There was no DNA or eyewitness directly linking any of the men to the shooting, and no one confessed.

Prosecutors argued that members of the Wellington Park crew stole a car and assembled an arsenal of weapons as part of a plot to target people associated with the Clay Terrace neighborhood. They alleged that masked men jumped out of the stolen Infiniti and, within 20 seconds, fired 50 bullets indiscriminately into the courtyard of an apartment complex in the early evening of July 16, 2018.

One of the bullets, fired from a rifle, pierced Makiyah's back, "obliterated" her heart and then exited through her chest, Assistant U.S. Attorney Laura Bach said during her closing arguments. Four other people in the courtyard, in the 300 block of 53rd Street NE, were wounded by the gunfire.

"They didn't care who they were shooting at. They didn't care who they hit. They just wanted to open fire," Bach said during her closing arguments.

Prosecutors also played graphic videos that showed the shooting and a dying Makiyah lying in the arms of her older sister.

The verdict came about a month after the fatal shooting of another 10-year-old in D.C.: Arianna Davis. Arianna was shot on Mother's Day in a similar barrage of gunfire as she rode in a vehicle with her family in the 3700 block of Hayes Street NE, less than three miles from where Makiyah lived.

At a news conference Tuesday, Matthew M. Graves, the U.S. attorney for the District, and Ashan Benedict, interim D.C. police chief, said homicides of children were among the top priorities for law enforcement. "There is nothing more gut-wrenching to us as prosecutors than homicides where children are killed," Graves said.

During the trial, prosecutors argued that Taylor, Thomas and Murchison shot during the encounter, while the other three men were part of the planning or helped hide the weapons afterward.

Authorities based much of their case on text messages and social media posts that authorities say showed the men boasting and rapping about the shooting.

Prosecutors also played recorded phone calls from the jail between several of the defendants and friends and family. Prosecutors said the defendants used coded language to talk about their involvement in the shooting.

In addition to the murder charges, the jurors found the men guilty of being part of an illegal street gang, which, along with Makiyah's age, will enhance the punishment, according to D.C. sentencing guidelines.

Defense attorneys argued that their clients had merely written lyrics about a lifestyle of guns and violence and that there was no evidence that the men were actually involved in the crimes of which they were accused.

The shooters wore masks and latex gloves. Fingerprints from only two of the defendants were found in a car that authorities say the men used in obtaining the weapons.

None of the men testified in their defense.

After the verdicts were announced, defense attorneys said they believed the jurors were unable to isolate the thousands of pieces of evidence to each specific defendant and instead lumped all of the evidence against the men as a group.

Jonathan Zucker, Taylor's attorney, said he and his client were "disappointed" in the verdict and planned to file an appeal. Zucker said that although Judge Robert Okun repeatedly instructed jurors to view the evidence against each of the six men in isolation, he believed trying the six men together created an "inherent prejudice" against them.

The jury found Cobbs, the youngest defendant, not guilty of 24 of the 25 charges, convicting him only of conspiracy to commit a crime of violence. Kevin McCants, Cobbs's attorney, said his client was "pleased" with the verdict.

Still, Cobbs - the only one on trial allowed out during the proceedings - faces narcotics and gun possession charges in Maryland after being arrested a month after the murder trial began.