Metrobus operator. Modeste was on his way home from church in the drive-through lane of a Prince George's County McDonald's, where he was picking up a meal for his bedridden brother.

Ross is charged with first- and second-degree murder, armed carjacking, and aggravated cruelty to an animal for allegedly shooting and killing two dogs during what police described as a series of crimes that day.

Probably less noticed were court documents showing that Ross was on probation for an armed robbery he committed at 16, when he held up people at knifepoint on a Metro train.

Lindsey Appiah, deputy mayor for public safety, charged during a February public hearing that while "[we've seen] increases in categories like carjackings and otherwise ... we have not seen a corresponding increase in commitment," which some observers took as a knock on the courts and Schwalb's office, which prosecutes juvenile crime.

In his defense, Schwalb echoes his predecessor, Karl A. Racine, who maintained that OAG prosecutors vigorously pursue all serious, violent cases when they have enough constitutionally acquired, admissible evidence to prove the case beyond a reasonable doubt - a higher standard than the probable cause that police must meet for making an arrest. And I agree, that is what prosecutors with integrity in our constitutional system must do.

The issue, at least for me, isn't whether to either lock up or divert more youths from detention. Of course, those found by a judge to be a danger to the community should be detained. And efforts and programs to deter youths from committing crimes in the first place are musts.

I think, however, of the 15-year-old who attempted to carjack Grandma, the two teens who tried to rob Brian Robinson Jr. and last Sunday afternoon's suspect in the deadly carjacking spree - and I dare to ask how effective is our juvenile justice system in addressing crime, deterring youth criminal behavior and reducing repeat offenders?

"Revolving door" charges and rejoinders get us nowhere. The city's growing juvenile crime problem is the burning issue at hand. Leaders should act like it - and work together to do something about it.