Metro
Local Digest

331 words
19 September 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

CORRECTION: A headline with a Local Digest item in the Sept. 19 Metro section incorrectly said a 34-year-old man was fatally shot in Northwest Washington. The shooting occurred in Northeast Washington. This version has been corrected.

Man dies after being shot in Northeast

A 34-year-old man was fatally shot Sunday afternoon in Northeast Washington, D.C. police said.

Michael McKinney of Northeast Washington died at a hospital, according to police. Efforts to reach his relatives were not successful.

The shooting occurred about 3:50 p.m. in the 1200 block of Brentwood Road NE.

By Monday morning, officials had not released more information about the circumstances of the shooting nor made an arrest.

The latest police data shows killings in the District up 29 percent compared with the same time in 2022, a year when the city surpassed 200 homicides for only the second time in nearly two decades.

- Emily Davies

VIRGINIA

Police: Man is fatally shot in Woodbridge

A 43-year-old man was killed in a shooting Saturday evening in Woodbridge, Prince William County police said.

Police responding to a shooting at 7:19 p.m. at the Summerland Heights Apartments in the 1800 block of Gableridge Turn found the victim, Kareem Rasheen Tyrone Harris of Woodbridge, suffering from gunshot wounds.

Police said in a statement that the suspected gunman, whom they identified as 25-year-old Malcom Andre Monts of Woodbridge, knew Harris.

Harris and Monts were arguing in the patio area of a ground-level apartment when Monts shot Harris before returning to his own apartment in the same building, police said. Police did not say why the two were arguing or how they knew each other.

Officers provided first aid to Harris, who later died at a hospital.

Monts was arrested without incident, charged with murder and use of a firearm in commission of a felony, and is being held without bond, police said.

- Omari Daniels