Metro
Man allegedly shoots two he says robbed him

Peter Hermann 
525 words
13 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B06
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A 28-year-old man shot and critically wounded two people he said robbed him at gunpoint in Northeast Washington, leaving one of the alleged assailants paralyzed, according to D.C. police and court documents.

A criminal complaint filed in D.C. Superior Court says authorities charged the apparent robbery victim - Nataniel Paul Arce-Washington with two counts of assault with intent to kill and using a firearm in the commission of a crime.

A judge on Wednesday ordered Arce-Washington detained and set a hearing for Monday. His attorney, Steven Ogilvie, declined to comment on the case.

The incident occurred Monday night in the 1200 block of Queen Street NE, in the Trinidad neighborhood.

Police said in the complaint that Arce-Washington told them he had driven to Queen Street to meet his girlfriend after having returned from a local casino. He said he didn't have much money with him because he had regambled his winnings.

Arce-Washington told police he parked and was opening the trunk when he was hit from behind and knocked to the ground, the criminal complaint says. He then told police he "felt the gun against his face," according to the complaint.

He said he fought back and knocked the gun from an assailant's hands, police said in the complaint. Police said the man reported a video game, shoes and clothing were taken in the robbery.

Arce-Washington declined to answer questions police posed about the shooting, saying he wanted to consult an attorney, according to the complaint. He told police that surveillance cameras "would show that he is telling the truth," the complaint says.

Police said an officer was four blocks from Queen Street when he heard gunfire. He drove toward the sound, police said, and saw a man later identified as Arce-Washington running down a street, clutching his waistband.

According to the criminal complaint, the officer chased Arce-Washington several blocks and saw him throw a firearm into a storm drain. Police said they found a Glock 9-millimeter handgun in the drain. Arce-Washington told police he ran because he feared the alleged assailants were still after him. Police said the man was treated at a hospital for cuts and a contusion to his head.

Police said that one of the men who had been shot was found with a wound to his neck and that he was "unconscious and barely breathing" at the scene. The criminal complaint says that man is paralyzed from the neck down and was in critical condition at a hospital. Police said the second person was shot twice in the abdomen and was also hospitalized in critical condition.

Police did not say in the complaint whether surveillance video captured the reported robbery. But police said cameras did capture the suspect firing at least 10 shots in the direction of two men as they got into a vehicle. One collapsed outside, with a handgun found in his waistband, according to the criminal complaint.

The other man managed to drive away before being located later, police said.