Metro
Local Digest

357 words
6 February 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Man dies in D.C. police custody, officials say

A man charged in the armed abduction of his girlfriend died Thursday in police custody, less than four hours after he was arrested, according to police.

Police said that Marquez Parker, 44, of Northwest Washington was discovered unconscious and not breathing at 10:30 a.m. during a prisoner check of the 2nd District cell block.

Officers contacted emergency medical personnel, administered Narcan, performed CPR and used a defibrillator as they attempted to revive him, according to police. D.C. Fire and Emergency Medical Services workers responded and pronounced him dead, police said.

The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner will determine the cause and manner of Parker's death, according to police. The police department's internal affairs bureau is investigating the incident, Paris Lewbel, the department's deputy director of communications, said in a statement.

A woman who answered a cellphone number listed for Parker declined to comment.

Parker was arrested without incident at 6:45 a.m. Thursday by members of the Capital Area Regional Fugitive Task Force on a warrant for armed kidnapping, police said.

His arrest had followed an extensive search in late July for his girlfriend, Selita Tashaun Lee, who police said appeared to have been kidnapped at gunpoint and forced into a vehicle in Northwest Washington.

A person had told police he saw a woman forced into a vehicle against her will, police said in July. Her relatives pleaded for her release. Lee was found safe hours later, police and relatives said.

Efforts to reach Lee and her relatives on Sunday were unsuccessful.

- Donna St. George

MARYLAND

Woman is found slain in Prince George's

A woman was found slain in Prince George's County on Saturday, police said.

She was found about 8:30 p.m. with unspecified trauma to the body in an apartment in the 3300 block of Curtis Drive, police said.

She died at the scene, police said.

The site is in the Temple Hills area, just south of Suitland Parkway and east of the Naylor Road Metro station.

- Martin Weil