Metro
Local Digest

482 words
11 March 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

15-year-old dies after Southeast shootout

A 15-year-old boy who was shot Tuesday night in Southeast Washington died Thursday, according to D.C. police. The youth is the second person killed during what authorities described as a shootout outside an apartment complex.

The youth was identified as Abdul Fuller of Southeast Washington. Also killed in the incident was Dana Faulkner, 23, also of Southeast. A third man was wounded, police have said.

Authorities said the shooting occurred about 7:45 p.m. in the 2700 block of Bruce Place SE, in Woodland Terrace. Police said officers who responded to the call found Faulkner dead at the scene.

Police said about 10 minutes later, they found Fuller unconscious at Wheeler Road and Mississippi Avenue in Southeast, more than two miles away in Congress Heights. Police said they believe Fuller had been driven there in a vehicle. No arrests have been made.

Attempts to reach Fuller's relatives Thursday were unsuccessful. He is the third youth killed by gunfire in the District this year. The others were ages 13 and 17.

Last year, 16 juveniles were fatally shot.

Police also have released information about two other killings that occurred this week.

On Thursday, police said Johnathan Craig, 34, of Lanham, Md., was fatally stabbed in the 1600 block of 17th Place SE, in the Fairlawn neighborhood near Minnesota Avenue.

The incident occurred about 2:40 a.m. on a sidewalk in front of a residence, according to a police report. The victim was pronounced dead at the scene.

And on Wednesday, police said Andrea Bond, 30, of Northeast, was found stabbed to death about 2:50 p.m. inside a residence in the 1100 block of D Street NE, approximately our blocks east of Stanton Park.

- Peter Hermann

MARYLAND

Police identify driver killed in tanker crash

Maryland State Police on Friday identified the driver who died after his tanker truck carrying gasoline crashed into a tree and exploded in Frederick County on Saturday.

Police said in a news release the victim is Ronald Leroy Heiston Jr., 58, of Smithsburg, Md.

Troopers responded for the single-vehicle crash with fire, which occurred just before noon off Route 15 North, about a half mile north of Rosemont Avenue, police said.

According to an initial investigation, Heiston was "driving a tanker truck with approximately 8,650 gallons of gasoline" from Manassas, Va., to Taneytown, Md., when for reasons unknown, the vehicle "left the right side of the road, struck a tree and caught fire," Maryland State Police said. Heiston died at the scene, police said.

Relatives of Heiston could not be immediately reached.

The crash temporarily shut down Route 15 in both directions. Six homes and five other vehicles were damaged by the fire, police said. There were no other injuries.

A crash investigation is ongoing.

- Jasmine Hilton