Metro
Two D.C. men sentenced in 2018 death of 10-year-old hit by stray bullet

Keith L. Alexander 
635 words
7 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Two of six men convicted in the 2018 fatal shooting of 10-year-old Makiyah Wilson, who was hit by a stray bullet on a Northeast D.C. street, were sentenced to prison Friday, one for 60 years and the other for six.

Makiyah was shot in the back in a barrage of gunfire early on a summer evening as she stood with her older sister near an ice cream truck in the Clay Terrace neighborhood. A total of 11 people were charged in connection with the killing. Isaiah Murchison, 24, and Marquell Cobbs, 21, who were sentenced Friday, were among six defendants who went on trial last summer.

D.C. Superior Court Judge Robert Okun sentenced Murchison, of Southeast D.C., to 60 years behind bars. Prosecutors argued that Murchison was one of the shooters. He was convicted of first-degree murder while armed and numerous other charges.

Cobbs, of Clinton, Md., who was 16 at the time of the shooting, was sentenced to six years. He was acquitted of murder and assault charges but convicted of conspiracy. Prosecutors argued that Cobbs supplied the guns that were used and facilitated the use of a stolen black Infiniti that the shooters were riding in.

Authorities said members of a neighborhood crew from the Wellington Park area of Southeast stole the car and assembled an arsenal of weapons as part of a plot to target people associated with the Clay Terrace neighborhood. On July 16, 2018, masked men jumped out of the stolen Infiniti and, within 20 seconds, fired 50 bullets indiscriminately into the courtyard of an apartment complex in the 300 block of 53rd Street NE.

Makiyah was killed, and four other people were wounded. Okun said it was a "miracle" that no one else died in an attack that turned a pleasant summer day in the neighborhood into a "horrible" tragedy.

Cobbs's attorney, Kevin McCants, asked the judge to sentence Cobbs under the D.C. Youth Rehabilitation Act, which would have allowed his conviction to be sealed if he successfully completed probation after his prison sentence.

But Assistant U.S. Attorney Laura Bach argued that Cobbs should not be eligible for sentencing under the act because he had a record of four juvenile offenses before the shooting. Okun denied McCants's request.

Attorneys for both men said they would appeal.

Makiyah's murder became a symbol in the nation's capital of the human toll of gun violence.

At Friday's sentencing, the girl's mother, Donnetta Wilson, who has since moved out of the Washington area, spoke via video about her daughter, calling her an "angel on Earth."

"This has been hard. This has been a big, tragic change for my family," Wilson said. "These prison sentences don't change the pain. My family and I will never be okay."

Makiyah's grandmother, Pandora Wilson, standing just feet from the two men, said the city has changed because of the shooting.

"Ya'll have made D.C. the worst place to live," she said.

In a letter to the judge, Michael Wilson, Mikayah's father, said he still struggles with losing his daughter. "She was my joy. You took my joy, the light of my life. I don't feel joy anymore," he wrote. Wilson, as he did during most of the trial, sat in the courtroom as his letter was read aloud. He was too emotional to speak.

The four other defendants convicted in the case last summer - Quentin Michals, 25, Qujuan Thomas, 24, Darrise Jeffers, 23, and Gregory Taylor, 27 - are scheduled to be sentenced later this month. A trial for remaining defendants is scheduled for next year.