Metro
MCPS moved official twice

Alexandra Robbins                Nicole Asbury 
1,184 words
9 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Montgomery County Public Schools in recent weeks has twice moved Khalid Walker, the investigator who closed an inquiry into misconduct allegations against former Farquhar Middle School principal Joel Beidleman, into new jobs - most recently on Friday, hours after The Washington Post sent questions asking why he had received a raise and a new position.

The Post reported in August that educators and parents complained to the school district at least 18 times in seven years about alleged sexual harassment, bullying and retaliation by Beidleman - and that Walker had ended an investigation into the principal in July by saying he had found no wrongdoing. After that story, Walker had an out-of-office message on his email for several weeks.

Last week, Walker's internal bio page on MCPS's website said he had a new job as acting assistant general counsel. Spokesman Chris Cram confirmed Friday about 4 p.m. that Walker had been moved to the general counsel's office and given an $11,893 raise.

Three hours later, Cram texted a Post reporter and said that Walker had again been moved - now to "a special assignment position within the Office of Human Resources and Development at his previous salary of $132,661."

Asked why the district had made the sudden change, Cram said Walker had first been moved "based on his skill set but that assignment was reevaluated by the Office of Human Resources and Development."

Several witnesses alleged disturbing details to Walker about Beidleman's harassment of a social studies teacher, according to The Post's investigation, including late-night texts telling her to "Come be with me" in a hotel room and a suggestion in front of three colleagues that she "should just f--- me." When she took a leave from her job and Beidleman called her repeatedly to say the absence looked "suspicious," Walker told her the actions qualified as "harassment," according to the teacher and a contemporaneous message she sent a co-worker about the conversation. Nevertheless, Walker found that Beidleman did not violate MCPS's sexual harassment policy and closed the case.

Walker referred questions to the district's spokesman. Beidleman did not answer a request to comment for this article. MCPS would not say if Schools Superintendent Monifa B. McKnight had approved the moves.

A reporter for The Post learned about Walker's new position in the general counsel's office Thursday.

Four former central office employees said that because Walker was elevated from an "N" level position to an "O" position, the move was a promotion because it comes with a raise and access to higher-level resources. The central office employees spoke on the condition of anonymity because they fear retribution by the school system.

In a first exchange of messages about the move Friday afternoon, Cram, the spokesman, said, "We don't see it as a promotion; he was literally swapped into an open position. However, because he is using his credentials as a lawyer, the position does earn an amount that is more than he was making previously."

Observers of MCPS were surprised about Walker's job in the general counsel's office. The posting "shows complete disregard and disrespect for the situation and for the victims," said a teacher who told Walker that Beidleman bullied and sexually harassed Farquhar educators. "Why even bother doing an investigation if they're going to continue to promote people who allow these behaviors to continue?"

Another teacher, who told the district that Beidleman sexually harassed her, said that learning about Walker's new role was "re-victimizing." The teachers spoke on the condition of anonymity because they feared retaliation by the school district. "They don't even have remorse or care about what I or anybody has gone through. McKnight said she reached out to us. Nobody reached out to me," she said.

Then, hours after confirming Walker's new job to The Post, MCPS said it had reduced his salary and moved him to a new assignment in the human resources department.

Walker was originally placed in the general counsel's office to fill an opening created by the departure of Danielle Miller, whom MCPS named acting director of Walker's old unit, the Department of Compliance and Investigations, Cram said. Michaele Simmons, Walker's former supervisor and the director of the department, is on leave, Cram confirmed, but he said he could not share the specifics about the leave. Simmons ran the office while it received multiple reports alleging that Beidleman sexually harassed, bullied and retaliated against staff. Simmons and Miller did not immediately answer requests to comment for this article.

Beidleman was promoted to run Paint Branch High School in Burtonsville early this summer, despite the 18 reports MCPS had received about his alleged misconduct. McKnight has said she was "not aware that there was an internal investigation against Dr. Joel Beidleman at the time of his promotion." The county school board has directed her to implement "a corrective action plan" so the district takes future abuse claims more seriously and keeps better track of investigations when promoting staff.

Still, four former central office employees told The Post that McKnight would have been aware of - and would have had to approve - her district's recent move of Walker to an O level position with a raise. "There's no way that McKnight wouldn't have known, procedurally and especially given what a key figure he is in all this, in the middle of a storm. It couldn't have slipped through," one former central office employee said.

Beidleman's former supervisor, associate superintendent of schools and well-being Diane Morris, is on administrative leave and receiving pay, Cram confirmed. Morris, the principal of Farquhar before Beidleman, was listed as the executive leader overseeing Beidleman's standard five-year evaluation during the 2022-2023 school year, according to a confidential internal school district document obtained by The Post. At least six people separately informed the Department of Compliance and Investigation in 2023 of Beidleman's misconduct. The Post was unable to reach Morris on Friday, but she has not responded to previous questions.

The personnel moves occurred about two weeks after Montgomery County Inspector General Megan Davey Limarzi said her office would open two investigative inquiries into the school system: The first will scrutinize the school district's handling of misconduct complaints against school system employees, and the second will look into all allegations of misconduct by Beidleman received by July 2023 - as well as any previous allegations that were not investigated.

Cram added Friday afternoon that while an investigation was underway, "it's important to put [Walker] in a different spot at this moment."

In an Aug. 17 video statement, McKnight said about the investigation, "If there is any rot, we will root it out. But I want to make it clear to everyone, there will be accountability."

Robbins, a freelance journalist, has been a substitute teacher in Montgomery County in a different school cluster from the ones described in this article.