Metro
Bowser's plan for tougher approach to crime meets resistance

Emily Davies 
801 words
28 June 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

The D.C. mayor's legislative proposal that would impose new penalties for gun crimes and make it easier to detain some youths awaiting trial encountered fierce resistance at a council hearing Tuesday, even as the city's top federal prosecutor and a host of residents said the bill would help reduce violent crime in the nation's capital.

D.C. Council member Janeese Lewis George (D-Ward 4) said the proposed legislation would be "incredibly traumatizing" to children. Two others - Robert C. White Jr. (D-At Large) and Christina Henderson (I-At Large) - referenced the mass incarceration of the 1980s and 1990s and said the bill could repeat mistakes of the past. And a representative from the American Civil Liberties Union of D.C. said it "contradicts the principles of human decency."

D.C. Deputy Mayor Lindsey Appiah, in a draft of her testimony, acknowledged concerns that the bill would "turn back the clock to the bygone era of tough on crime practices," but insisted that the city could increase accountability without resorting to mass incarceration.

"These unacceptable crime increases are occurring amid the backdrop of significant decreases in MPD sworn staffing and despite historic and unmatched investments in violence intervention and prevention," Appiah said in the draft of her testimony, using an abbreviation for the D.C. police department. "It's time to pivot."

Killings in the city are on a pace not seen in decades, carjackings have similarly soared, and 65 children and teenagers have been shot in D.C. so far this year. With 112 people slain as of Tuesday, according to D.C. police, the city is on track to have its most deadly year since 2003.

More than 160 public witnesses were scheduled to testify Tuesday at the council's hearing on the bill, introduced last month by Council Chairman Phil Mendelson (D), including pastors, business owners, criminal defense attorneys, people who have served time in prison, and families of crime victims. The list was so long that testifiers had no more than three minutes to speak, and government officials were not expected to testify until late Tuesday night.

D.C. Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) offered the measure, known as Safer Stronger 2.0, as her answer to residents demanding that their government do more to make the District safer. But the legislation's implementation is contingent on the council's willingness to pass it, and four council members who testified Tuesday expressed opposition to parts of the bill.

That tension between the mayor and the council around how to address crime is familiar. Earlier this year, they sparred over a revision to the District's criminal code - with the mayor vetoing the measure that would have decreased sentences for some crimes, only to have the council override her. Congress ultimately weighed in and voted to block local legislation for the first time in more than 30 years.

On Tuesday, some council members acknowledged that the city might need to change how it addresses violence - and perhaps adopt a tougher approach. More than three years after the onset of the coronavirus pandemic, some large cities have reversed upticks in crime that came during it, but the District's violence problem has continued to intensify.

The mayor's proposal contains subtle edits to the District's legal code that could have real impacts on whether people charged with crimes are held in jail while their cases proceed through the court system. One of the most controversial elements is that it would allow judges to consider whether pretrial detention would protect children and teenagers charged with violent crimes, making it easier to order them held. The bill would also allow for more pretrial detention for adults charged with violent crimes who were previously convicted of violent offenses, saying a judge's first assumption, in those cases, should be that there are no conditions that could safely allow for their release.

Many people testified in opposition to those provisions in the bill, including Hilary Cairns, the former director of youth rehabilitation services under Bowser, who said detaining more youths would "unnecessarily harm" children and teens and burden facilities already struggling with overcrowding and staffing shortages.

D.C. Attorney General Brian L. Schwalb (D), whose office prosecutes juveniles, also expressed his disapproval: "The proposed changes to the juvenile pretrial detention statute will not make us safer or stronger," he said in a statement.

Other top officials were expected to testified in support of the changes, including a representative from the U.S. attorney for D.C.'s office, which said in a statement that the bill would "make our judicial system work better, and, consequently, increase community safety."

Peter Hermann contributed to this report.