Metro
Local Digest

455 words
17 May 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Former police union

official guilty of fraud

A former vice chairman of the D.C. police union pleaded guilty Monday to fraudulently taking pay from D.C. police while secretly working a second job at Whole Foods Market.

Seated next to his attorney in D.C. Superior Court, Medgar Webster Sr. pleaded guilty to first-degree felony fraud in connection with the theft that federal prosecutors say occurred between Jan. 11, 2021, and April 2, 2022.

Webster, 52, was arrested and charged in early February. A few weeks later, he retired after 33 years with the department, a D.C. police spokesman said.

According to prosecutors, while working for D.C. police, Webster simultaneously collected pay for a job at Whole Foods stores in the 1400 block of P Street NW, the 100 Block of H Street SE and the 200 block of I Street NW.

Officers sometimes work security jobs for businesses, but prosecutors said D.C. police supervisors never approved Webster's outside employment at the stores, and Webster reported the hours he was there as overtime for the city.

After a prosecutor outlined the details of the case, Judge Errol Arthur asked Webster how he planned to plead.

"Guilty, your honor," Webster said.

As part of his plea, Webster faces up to 10 years in prison. He also agreed to repay D.C. police nearly $34,000. He is scheduled to be sentenced July 25.

A D.C. police spokesman declined to comment on the case. The D.C. police union did not immediately respond to messages. Webster's attorney, Gayle L. Terry, also did not respond to calls or emails.

- Keith L. Alexander

VIRGINIA

Three fatally stabbed

at Pr. William home

Three adults were fatally stabbed Tuesday in a Prince William County house, according to a county police spokeswoman, who described the incident as an apparent domestic situation.

"We're not entirely clear on all the events leading up to this," said the spokeswoman, Officer Renee Carr. "At this time, the three parties believed to be involved in the altercation are accounted for and there is no known threat to the community."

She said someone in the house, in the county's Woodbridge area, called 911 about 7 a.m. to report the stabbings. When officers arrived at the brick residence, in the 5100 block of Cannon Bluff Drive, Carr said, they found a 70-year-old woman dead and two men, ages 67 and 38, seriously injured. She said the men died at a hospital.

The three were family members whose names were not made public, pending notification of other relatives, Carr said. She said no one else was inside the house.

- Paul Duggan