Metro
Police accuse 85-year-old of killing his wife in an argument over pancakes

Keith L. Alexander 
475 words
17 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C05
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

An 85-year-old man accused of killing his 81-year-old wife in their D.C. home last weekend told a homicide detective that he stabbed her with a carving knife during an argument over whether he should have pancakes for breakfast, according to a police affidavit.

Steven Schwartz, who lived with his wife, Sharon Schwartz, in the 1300 block of Corcoran Street NW, said in a police interview that he had lost weight in recent months because of physical and psychiatric disorders and that his wife thought it would be good for him to eat more, according to the affidavit, filed in D.C. Superior Court.

Speaking with Detective Jeffery Clay, Steven Schwartz "indicated that he lost 45-50lbs in the hospital and that his wife wanted him to get back to 180lbs," the affidavit says. It says Schwartz told Clay that his wife "was a bit of a taskmaster, but she was doing it for his benefit." Sharon Schwartz "loved him so much that [she] wanted him to be well and that she wanted her partner and protector back."

Sunday morning, when his wife "asked him if he was going to have breakfast," according to the affidavit, Schwartz replied "that he had a quarter of a Krispy Kreme [doughnut] the day before." He "indicated that he would try to eat a pancake with not too much syrup," but he changed his mind, and an argument ensued.

"The next thing [he] heard was a plate crashing against the wall," the affidavit says, after which "he reached and grabbed a carving knife from a holder."

A neighbor heard a woman scream in the house and called for help, according to the affidavit. When police arrived, they found Sharon Schwartz's body near the front door. She had been stabbed once in the back and, an autopsy later found, the blade had pierced her heart. Police said Steven Schwartz was clutching a knife and would not let go of it until an officer stunned him with a Taser. He was taken to a hospital with what police said was a self-inflicted stab wound.

Schwartz, who said his mental problems include depression and paranoia, told Detective Clay that he "loved that woman for 40 years," the affidavit says. Charged with second-degree murder, he appeared Thursday in Superior Court and was ordered held pending a Jan. 2 preliminary hearing.

As his wife lay on the floor, Schwartz said in the police interview, he leaned down and kissed her," calling it "the most beautiful kiss," according to the affidavit. At the hospital, the affidavit says, he told medical workers: "She doesn't deserve this. I deserve it. She does not. I killed her. Oh, my Lord."