Metro
Driver fleeing Secret Service kills pedestrian

Peter Hermann 
330 words
13 July 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B02
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A car whose driver fled a traffic stop by a uniformed Secret Service officer Wednesday afternoon struck several people in a crosswalk near the White House, killing a 75-year-old man, then sped off and is being sought, according to authorities.

Lt. Paul Mayhair, a spokesman for the Secret Service's uniformed division, which secures the executive mansion and its perimeter, said the incident occurred about 1:30 p.m. at 17th Street and Constitution Avenue in Northwest Washington, near the Ellipse and the Washington Monument.

The spokesman said an officer tried to stop a blue 2006 Honda Accord with an expired registration headed south on 17th Street. Mayhair said the driver appeared to stop but then sped off, went through a red light and struck the pedestrians in a crosswalk less than a block away.

Mayhair said the Secret Service officer did not pursue the Honda.

Authorities said a 13-year-old girl, also injured in the crash, was treated at a hospital for injuries not believed to be life-threatening. The U.S. Park Police, which is leading the investigation, said the 75-year-old man, from Philadelphia, died at a hospital. His identity had not been made public Wednesday evening.

Mayhair said the driver of the Honda did not stop and that police are looking for the car, which had Virginia license plate 8718BE.

A D.C. Department of Motor Vehicles website shows that a vehicle with that tag number had three unpaid speeding tickets that, by Wednesday, had accumulated $720 in fines.

The most recent violation was from August 2022, when the car was caught speeding 16 to 20 mph over the limit in the 1300 block of H Street NE. The other two tickets - one in January 2022 and the other in April 2021 - were for speeding 11 to 15 mph over the limit in Southeast Washington.

Emily Davies contributed to this report.