Metro
Prosecutors won't charge off-duty officer who fatally shot man at the Wharf

Keith L. Alexander 
454 words
24 February 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B04
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Federal prosecutors on Thursday announced they would not file charges against an off-duty D.C. police commander who fatally shot a man outside a restaurant at the Wharf last year.

The incident occurred on July 16 around 9 p.m. Prosecutors said Cmdr. Jason Bagshaw of the Special Operations Division and his wife - a D.C. police investigator - were seated inside a restaurant in the 800 block of Wharf Street SW, when diners began crouching and crawling on the floor after they noticed a commotion outside.

Security camera footage released after the shooting showed Bagshaw, in civilian clothes, running toward the disturbance. Police said at the time that he saw a man pointing a handgun at another person; a representative for the man's family said he was being robbed and was protecting a friend.

In a statement Thursday, prosecutors said Bagshaw retrieved his Glock 17 service pistol from its holster, pointed it at 23-year-old Lazarus David Wilson, of Dumfries, Va., and yelled "MPD, drop the gun!" Wilson did not, and Bagshaw fired once, striking Wilson in the face, prosecutors said.

Andrew Clarke, an attorney for the Wilson family, said Wilson's relatives wished prosecutors had presented the case to a grand jury and allowed the panel to decide if charges should be filed. He said the family plans to file a lawsuit against Bagshaw and the police department.

"It saddens us that the government chose to take this decision out of the hands of the citizens of the District of Columbia," Clarke said. "This is becoming a narrative that Black people in America know all too well. That their lives don't matter."

Through a police spokesman, Bagshaw declined to comment.

Bagshaw was not wearing a body camera because he was off-duty. The U.S. attorney's office and the police department's Internal Affairs Division interviewed witnesses, and examined forensic reports and security video, prosecutors said in the statement. Police recovered a .45-caliber Glock handgun loaded with a dozen bullets that they said Wilson had been holding.

"After a careful, thorough, and independent review of the evidence, federal prosecutors found insufficient evidence to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Cmdr. Bagshaw used excessive force under the circumstances," the U.S. attorney's office said in a statement.

The office said to substantiate civil rights charges, "prosecutors must typically be able to prove that the involved officers willfully used more force than was reasonably necessary."

Bagshaw has been singled out in the past by activist groups, who have questioned his conduct handling demonstrations, particularly those involving racial justice.