Metro
Local Digest

382 words
17 March 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Police make arrests in two homicides

D.C. police have made arrests in two separate homicides, one that occurred this month in the Fairlawn neighborhood and the other in August near the Gallery Place Metro station in Chinatown.

Police on Wednesday said they arrested Garland Davis, 64, in connection to the death of Johnathan Craig.

Craig, 34, was fatally stabbed March 9 in the 1600 block of 17th Place SE.

A witness told police that Davis stabbed Craig inside the witness's bedroom, after Davis had asked the witness if they wanted to be with him and the witness replied, "No, I am dating [Craig]", according to charging documents.

Davis's attorney could not be immediately reached.

On Wednesday, D.C. police also arrested 25-year-old Dwayne Brooks Jr. in the killing of 21-year-old Juwaan Henry.

Henry was fatally shot Aug. 25 near the Gallery Place-Chinatown Metro station. At the time, Henry's mother, reached at her home in Charlotte, said that her son had not been in the D.C. area for long and that she knew nothing about the shooting.

There was no attorney listed for Brooks in court records.

- Emily Davies

VIRGINIA

Bald eaglet hatches along Dulles Greenway

A bald eaglet has hatched at a nest in Northern Virginia, and it's likely two others at a nest in Washington have also hatched, experts said.

On Tuesday, the eaglet hatched in the nest along the Dulles Greenway. The eaglet's parents - Rosa and Martin - have two more eggs they're incubating in a nest in a wetlands area of Leesburg, so wildlife experts are watching closely for those to hatch sometime this week.

The eaglet was captured hatching on video, with live-streaming cameras placed close to the nest.

"We are elated," Terry Hoffman, a spokesman for the Dulles Greenway, said in a statement.

Last year, Rosa and Martin - named by Loudoun County students in honor of Rosa Parks and Martin Luther King Jr. - had an eaglet that was named Orion.

Bald eagles usually lay one to three eggs a year, and the eaglets hatch about 35 days after being incubated. After hatching, baby eaglets usually fly away from the nest, in about 10 to 12 weeks.

- Dana Hedgpeth