Metro
Suspect in judge's killing is found dead

Justin Jouvenal                Omari Daniels 
819 words
27 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A man who allegedly shot and killed a Maryland judge hours after the jurist awarded custody of the man's children to his estranged wife was found dead Thursday after a week-long search that spanned multiple states, authorities announced.

Searchers discovered the body of Pedro Argote, 49, in a heavily wooded area of Washington County, about 10 miles from where Argote allegedly opened fire on Washington County Circuit Court Judge Andrew Wilkinson in the driveway of his Hagerstown home on Oct. 19. Argote's Mercedes-Benz SUV was found over the weekend by a member of the public about a mile from where he was found dead.

Washington County Sheriff Brian K. Albert said at a news conference Thursday that he would not comment before Argote's body is examined on when or how Argote died.

"The Washington County community can breathe a little easier this afternoon," Albert said. "It's relief, but still a tragedy that we're dealing with. Most of us have not slept a good night's sleep since last Thursday."

Albert said that he had just come from Wilkinson's viewing and that the family was relieved Argote was no longer a threat.

The slaying about 75 miles northwest of D.C. drew national attention and an outpouring of remembrances for the judge from friends, colleagues, Maryland politicians and the state's governor. It also stirred concern - it was the latest in a string of high-profile attacks targeting judges and other public officials in recent years.

Law enforcement increased security for judges in Washington County and throughout Maryland as a precautionary measure.

Authorities returned to the area near where Argote's car was found to mount a fresh search Thursday as part of a routine reexamination of the scene, Albert said. Argote was considered armed and dangerous, and authorities had announced a $10,000 reward for his capture.

Albert said previously that deputies were called to Wilkinson's home about 8 p.m. Oct. 19 for a report of a shooting. They found Wilkinson suffering from multiple gunshot wounds in the driveway of the home. He was transported to a hospital, where he died.

Earlier in the day, Wilkinson held a hearing to finalize Argote's divorce from his wife, Eugenia. Wilkinson awarded custody of Argote's four children to his estranged wife and forbade the father from seeing them. An attorney who formerly represented Argote said in an interview that Argote was worried about the prospect of losing custody of the children, ages 12, 11, 5 and 3.

Argote did not attend the hearing.

Wilkinson found there had been "cruelty of treatment" in the relationship. Eugenia Argote had accused her husband of stealing money from her and once sought a restraining order against him, saying he had a gun on him "at all times." She later decided to drop seeking the order.

"This was a targeted attack," Albert said at a previous news conference.

Authorities have not said how Argote found the judge at his residence. Albert said Wilkinson's wife and son were home at the time of the shooting.

Stephanie Wilkinson, the judge's wife, released a statement Wednesday saying the family was touched by the response to the judge's slaying.

"We are grateful for their prayers, thoughts, and love during this tragic time," she said. "This is such an unexpected loss to us, and words do not exist to describe the amazing person Drew was."

A funeral for Wilkinson is scheduled for 10 a.m. Friday at a Catholic church in Hagerstown.

Wilkinson, 52, had been a judge in circuit court since 2020. He was born in Guam, graduated from the Emory University School of Law in 1997 and began practicing law in Maryland that year. He was appointed to the bench by then-Gov. Larry Hogan (R).

Wilkinson was remembered as a "beloved family man," a "person of high ethical standards" and a "true champion for our community" by people who knew him. Gov. Wes Moore (D) said in a statement that he was "shocked, heartbroken and sickened" by Wilkinson's killing.

"He was the victim of a cold-blooded, vicious, and targeted attack," Moore said in a statement.

The Maryland State Committee of the American College of Trial Lawyers said in a statement that it "grieves the assassination" of Wilkinson and called for government action to protect the safety, security and independence of all state and federal judges in the country.

"We cannot tolerate violence or threats of violence against judges or any other public servants at work, home, or any other location," the committee's statement read. "Judges must be free to fulfill their judicial duties fearlessly, deciding cases solely on the basis of the facts and the law, without being concerned that an aggrieved party will exact retribution."