Metro
Lawyer: Driver in fatal crash had her license despite DUIs

Keith L. Alexander                Emily Davies                Luz Lazo 
701 words
7 June 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A U.S. Park Police officer pulled over Nakita Walker on Rock Creek Parkway, telling the woman with five prior DUIs that she had been traveling almost 80 mph and ordering her passenger to pour out the contents of a red plastic cup, video of the encounter shows. But as the officer walked back to his own vehicle and sat down, Walker sped away - reaching speeds of up to 100 mph, authorities said, before plowing head-on into a Honda less than a mile away.

At a hearing in D.C. Superior Court on Tuesday, authorities showed graphic footage and revealed new details of the crash that killed three people, and a defense attorney publicly confirmed that Walker had a valid license at the time of the crash - although D.C. law suggests that her convictions should have resulted in it being revoked.

The deadly collision already had sparked outrage over whether city officials were doing enough to keep bad drivers off the roads; the SUV that Walker drove had more than 40 outstanding traffic tickets with fines that totaled $12,300. Prosecutors noted in court Tuesday that Walker, 43, had racked up five DUIs since 2009.

"She seems to make a habit of doing this," Assistant U.S. Attorney Jamie Carter said. "She's a danger to this community."

Killed in the crash were Mohamed Kamara, a 42-year-old Lyft driver; and his passengers, Olvin Torres Velasquez and Jonathan Cabrera Mendez, both 23.

About 20 family members and supporters of the victims sat in the courtroom and began wiping tears as photos of Kamara's smashed Honda were shown.

Walker, charged with second-degree murder in connection with the deaths, also wiped away tears.

Authorities said Walker's blood alcohol level at the time of the crash was .10, above the legal limit of .08. She also tested positive for marijuana.

The D.C. Department of Motor Vehicles has long declined to address whether Walker had a valid license.

Responding to inquiries from D.C. Council member Charles Allen (D-Ward 6), chairman of the council's transportation committee, DMV Director Gabriel Robinson said in a letter Monday that a person who has three alcohol-related offenses within five years would have their license revoked, with the option to seek reinstatement after five years. The DMV generally handles the revocation process after being notified by the courts of a conviction.

But Robinson said that officials found "technical changes to the file transfer" that "may have affected DMV's ability to process the files" related to Walker. A D.C. Superior Court spokesman has asserted that his records showed the motor vehicle agency had been properly notified of Walker's three past convictions for driving under the influence in D.C.

When the Park Police officer pulled over Walker at 1:34 a.m. just north of the Kennedy Center, he told her, "You were flying," as he relayed her speed.

Walker told the officer that "I left my 10-year-old son at home by himself" and that she was trying to get to the house.

Court documents asserted that Walker and her passenger had been drinking Hennessy cognac. The officer told them that they were not allowed to have an open container of alcohol while driving.

Then, as the officer walked back to his own car, Walker sped away.

At 1:39 a.m., about a mile from where she was stopped, Walker's Sirius XM radio called 911 to alert authorities of a crash, Park Police Detective Kevin Turner testified.

Walker told police that she sped off because she believed her boyfriend had an illegal firearm and did not want him to get arrested.

Turner said a firearm was not found at the scene of the crash.

Walker's public defender, Dana Page, said her client, who was hospitalized after the accident, still needed physical therapy and medications, and asserted that she was not receiving the proper treatment at the D.C. jail.

Judge Robert Okun ordered Walker to remain in jail until trial, citing her repeated DUIs.