Metro
Mental health troubles put strain on D.C.'s supportive housing

Steve Thompson 
2,707 words
17 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

One man was caught on video starting a fire in his apartment building. Another punched an elderly woman in the face. Another was the target of a police raid, accused by officers of hosting a drug den.

Each has been the beneficiary of an apartment subsidized through D.C.'s permanent supportive housing program while their landlords spent months and months trying to evict them.

The trouble, from a small minority of participants, is straining the long-standing program key to Mayor Muriel E. Bowser's pledge to end chronic homelessness in the nation's capital. Designed to usher unhoused people into mixed-income living with intensive services for problems such as mental illness and addiction, the initiative has struggled in recent years as the number of participants has doubled to more than 5,000, focusing public attention on the gap between the program's ideals and what is happening on the ground.

While advocates for the unhoused underscore that the program is among the city's best solutions to a chronic, systemic challenge, landlords say insufficient support for participants with serious mental illness and other needs leaves them to face problems they are not equipped to solve, sometimes endangering other tenants. Backup has not often come from the D.C. Housing Authority, which administers the program's vouchers and rarely enforces its own policies on serious lease violations, agency figures show. A backlogged eviction court, landlords say, leaves them and other tenants to navigate troubling or illegal behavior for often close to a year or more.

"I'm paying my rent, and I'm a civically engaged citizen, and instead of giving me more protection, I feel more vulnerable, and it's just not fair," said Reginald Black, a voucher holder who says his apartment building in the 16th Street Heights neighborhood has been overrun by drug sales. Two program participants there have been the subject of police drug raids and face months-old eviction cases - yet they are still there. Like many tenants, Black blames his landlord for not doing enough to stop the illegal activity.

Recognizing the issue, D.C. Superior Court administrators are making changes to expedite serious eviction claims, asking landlords to flag cases that involve alleged assault or other conduct that poses immediate dangers. The court is trying to reduce the delay between a landlord's complaint and the initial hearing, now more than three months, to less than two months.

Some affordable housing advocates do not welcome the change. "Fast-tracking an eviction matter does not fix crime, poverty, a mental health system crisis or the decades of disinvestment in affordable housing and tenant support systems," Rebecca Lindhurst, managing attorney for Bread for the City's housing practice, said in an email. Evictions, she said, "lead to homelessness resulting in even worse outcomes for those who are evicted, our communities and our city."

D.C. Council member Matthew Frumin (D-Ward 3), whose ward includes a stretch of Connecticut Avenue in Northwest Washington that is home to many program participants, encouraged the eviction court change and called it "a very big step" among many - such as more effective social services - needed to address how the city deals with chronic homelessness.

Frumin said the program has been a salvation for many, but "there are other people - it's a smaller group of people - for whom independent living is not the right answer at this point for them. We need to have alternatives for those people," he said, of participants with serious mental illness or ongoing drug problems. "And we shouldn't put our hands over our eyes, and hands over our ears, and just drop them into an independent living setting and not acknowledge the consequences for them and for the people around them."

Last October, firefighters responded to a report of smoke inside an apartment building in Northwest Washington along Wisconsin Avenue. Arson investigators soon arrived to find residents of the four-story building, called Observatory Park, outside waiting to be told it was safe to return.

Security cameras soon showed investigators what had happened. Building resident Chris McMillan had carried his microwave down to the bottom-floor trash room, put a lithium battery inside and started it up, video shows.

A month earlier, police had been summoned as McMillan walked around the building with a stun gun and assaulted one of his neighbors with bear spray, records show. He pleaded guilty to an assault charge, was sentenced to time served in February and released from jail, where a court-appointed psychologist noted that he had exhibited "disorganized behaviors" but found him competent to stand trial. A lawyer for McMillan, Quo Judkins of Howard University's Clinical Law Center, declined to comment on his case.

McMillan's landlord, Petra Development, emailed the D.C. Housing Authority the video of him starting the fire soon afterward, records show, before Petra sued to evict him. A year later, the housing authority was still paying his rent, a tenant ledger shows.

Federal regulations and housing authority policy prohibit housing voucher holders from committing serious or repeated lease violations, as well as from engaging in drug-related or violent criminal activity that encroaches on their neighbors' peace or safety. But during the past two years, the authority has terminated fewer than a dozen of more than 20,000 vouchers for such violations, its officials say.

"Our primary purpose is to house people," the authority's director of external affairs, Hammere Gebreyes, said in an interview. "That's what we are in the business to do."

Several landlords interviewed for this story said that when they approach the D.C. Housing Authority about lease-breaking tenants, they are told to enforce the lease. Authority officials, in exchanges with The Washington Post, said much the same. "Landlords are responsible for lease enforcement, as DCHA is not a party to the lease," Rachel Joseph, the authority's chief operating officer, said in an email. She said that when landlords advise the authority of lease violations, a mediation team attempts to resolve conflicts. She also noted that the termination of a voucher does not remove the tenant from a property; for that, eviction is still necessary.

The D.C. mayor's office says caseworkers try hard to allow program participants to maintain stable housing. "This often includes working directly with landlords to mediate challenging situations and supporting clients in avoiding evictions where possible," said a statement sent by Rebecca Dooley, a spokeswoman for the Office of the D.C. Deputy Mayor for Health and Human Services. "In the event an eviction is inevitable, the case manager will support the resident in identifying and moving into new housing."

The District's permanent supportive housing program claims an approach known as "housing first" - immediate housing followed by intensive services to help people work toward goals like stability and sobriety. To be eligible, a participant must be chronically homeless and have a disabling condition such as addiction or mental illness. Once participants are housed, caseworkers contracted by the city's Department of Human Services are allowed to make as few as two contacts with them a month, the contracts show. There is no requirement that participants engage with any services.

Ideally, in permanent supportive housing programs, landlords work separately from service providers, according to principles recommended by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. That's so the landlord can focus on housing concerns such as rent, maintenance and leases, while the service provider can focus on treatment planning and case management. While landlords cannot turn away renters because they use subsidies under D.C. law, landlords in practice must often be willing to accept government paperwork delays and make other accommodations to enable voucher holders to enter leases. City officials say there are not enough housing providers willing to do so.

Some number of evictions are a predictable part of even well-functioning permanent supportive housing programs, where a new home may not go smoothly on the first try.

"This person is doing illegal activities in the building - that would be to me grounds for eviction or arrest," Sam Tsemberis, a social researcher credited with pioneering the housing-first model, told The Post. "That's not a good outcome - for that person. But, you know, it protects other people in the community."

Under housing-first principles, an eviction does not mean an individual loses services, and the program will offer a participant who has lost their housing a new unit, depending on circumstances.

Frumin, the council member, said police visits have gone up steeply in recent years to buildings that have hosted an influx of program participants. One building along Connecticut Avenue saw the number of police calls for service - ranging from noise complaints to assaults - rise to more than 200 last year from fewer than 50 in 2018, dispatch data gathered by its tenant association show. During the same period, the building filled more than 50 of its 305 units with voucher holders, a portion of whom need intensive case management, according to data obtained by The Post.

"One piece of it is that there are certain folks who could thrive if they got more services," Frumin said, "and that's not always happening in the way that it should."

Craig London, a landlord who has leased multifamily buildings for nearly two decades, said the city needs more buildings with intensive case management on-site.

"Let's say I have a 10-unit building, and I have one terrible tenant that's destabilizing the other nine families," he said. "The other nine families, they ask me a simple question: 'What are you going to do?'"

McMillan left his apartment after a blaze in June that Petra told the housing authority in an email was caused when he set fire to his couch. His landlord-tenant case dragged on, taking nearly 11 months from its December 2022 filing to reach a judgment, in which a judge set aside the arguments of McMillan's Howard University lawyers and granted Petra possession.

Such lengthy landlord-tenant cases are the norm.

Leon Miller lives in the 16th Street Heights neighborhood in a one-bedroom apartment at a building called the Madison. The apartment had been another chance for Miller. A few months before signing the lease, he had received a year of probation for selling $30 worth of crack cocaine to an undercover officer. During the court process, he had attended a drug-treatment program.

Last year, as the Madison's security cameras rolled, a stream of drug clients visited Miller's apartment, police allege. The landlord, Petra, had given officers direct access to the surveillance system. An officer who watched the footage one day saw two dozen people come and go, spending "anywhere from seconds to minutes inside," according to a search warrant application. When officers executed the search, they came away with a small bag with two white rocks, a glass pipe and scales.

Miller, who declined to be interviewed by The Post, was arrested, then released the next day when the U.S. attorney's office in D.C. declined to prosecute. Petra sued to evict Miller in April. The initial hearing in D.C. Superior Court was not until September, four months later. Robert Donahue, a lawyer for Petra, told the judge: "The conduct is ongoing. We still have a constant stream of traffic around the unit."

Miller, who did not have a lawyer, shook his head. "There's no traffic going on in my house," he told the judge.

The judge, Stephen Rickard, set mediation for five months later, in February 2024, and a trial date for May.

The duration and uncertainty of the eviction process has led some landlords to pursue additional legal measures.

Last year, after a program participant in Chevy Chase Tower punched an elderly neighbor in the mouth, threw a lit cigarette at someone's face and created other disturbances, police said, management company Alvin L. Aubinoe sought a court order barring him from the property, rather than waiting for his eviction case to unfold.

The tenant, Eric Reavis, had at least two previous assault convictions and a history of mental illness, court records show. "Chevy Chase Tower residents live in constant fear of Mr. Reavis' escalating violence," an Aubinoe filing in civil court said. The eviction suit was unlikely to come to trial before the following April, Aubinoe's lawsuit said, adding that "Aubinoe and the Chevy Chase Tower residents cannot wait nine months for relief ending this ordeal."

In April, a judge lifted a temporary restraining order barring Reavis from the property but ordered him to stay away from several people, including the woman he allegedly punched. The eviction case, in which Reavis has received help from the Legal Aid Society of D.C., is still pending.

"He is functioning, except for these unfortunate events," said Raymond Jones, a lawyer for Reavis in his criminal case. He couldn't speak to the District's housing programs, he said, "but I guess you try to get the people as much help as you can."

The vast majority of eviction cases are for nonpayment of rent, rather than alleged lease violations, although the proportion of lease violation cases is growing. Last year, 7,709 nonpayment cases were filed in D.C., down steeply from about 30,000 in the years between 2012 and 2019. The drop was in part caused by statutory changes, including a new minimum of $600 in unpaid rent required before a case could be brought, court officials say. Alleged lease-violation cases, on the other hand, have risen. Last year, they totaled 1,897, a rise of more than 20 percent over pre-pandemic years, according to data provided to The Post by the court. The court does not keep data on how many cases involve tenants using subsidies.

Initial hearings for eviction cases are scheduled three to four months from filing, court records show. Before the pandemic, that period was typically 28 to 75 days, D.C. courts spokesman Doug Buchanan said. He attributed the increased delay both to pandemic-related backlogs and changes the court has made to ensure fairness for tenants.

Cases used to be called in person at 9 a.m., which created barriers to attendance that ultimately favored landlords, Buchanan said in an emailed statement. Now, the court offers virtual hearings scheduled in hour-long blocks throughout the day. "The improvements for access to justice have been staggering," Buchanan said, as the default rate has dropped from about 20 percent to near zero. But the change has also backed up the system.

To move things along faster, the court has devoted an additional judge and courtroom to landlord-tenant cases, Buchanan said. Beginning after Thanksgiving, the court would increase the number of hearings scheduled from eight per hour to 11.

In addition to these changes, court administrators have added a box for landlords to check in cases of tenants accused of dangerous conduct. Buchanan said they will be scheduled for initial hearings roughly 35 to 50 days from filing.

Marian Siegel, executive director of Housing Counseling Services, which helps low-income residents find and maintain housing, raised a note of caution about the change. Before checking a box that would accelerate a case, she said, landlords need to distinguish between annoying behaviors and dangerous ones.

"Just because you're exhibiting certain behaviors that might be different, that doesn't mean you're dangerous," she said. "Living around people who are mentally ill is a part of life, and I don't think we can keep them away from housing. We can't say they don't have a right to a place to live."

Alexander Rossello, a spokesman for the Apartment and Office Building Association of Metropolitan Washington, said the changes are a positive step for both landlords and renters.

"They want to feel safe, and they want to be safe," Rossello said. "And the inability to take action in a lot of these situations, from a legal perspective, really leaves both parties in a no-win situation."