Metro
Local Digest

498 words
19 January 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Man pleads guilty in teen's shooting

A Maryland man pleaded guilty Wednesday in D.C. Superior Court to voluntary manslaughter in the 2020 fatal shooting of a 17-year-old.

Brandon Nguyen, 24, of Laurel, pleaded guilty to the Sept. 29, 2020, slaying of 17-year-old Brian Ward in Northwest Washington. Prosecutors said Nguyen shot Ward in the 300 block of Allison Street Northwest after a dispute during a marijuana deal, then drove Ward's body and dumped it in a wooded area in Laurel.

Nguyen then used bleach to clean the van, prosecutors said.

For nearly a year, the youth was deemed missing. Then in December 2021, prosecutors said, Nguyen took authorities to the wooded area to where he dumped the teen's body to allow authorities to recover the skeletal remains. Nguyen was charged nearly a year later. He is scheduled to be sentenced in April by Judge Rainey R. Brandt.

- Keith L. Alexander

Police arrest teen in fatal shootout

A woman was killed and two other people were wounded Tuesday night in an outburst of gunfire at a carryout restaurant in Southeast Washington, D.C. police said.

She was shot in the head about 8:50 p.m. and found in the 5000 block of Benning Road SE, said Cmdr. Darnel Robinson, who heads the police's 6th District. She died at the scene.

Police identified the victim Wednesday as Dale Henson, a 54-year-old from Southeast. Authorities charged the 15-year-old, whom they did not identify because of his age, with second-degree murder while armed.

The incident began when a man and the 15-year-old were shot and wounded outside an establishment. Police said the teen, hit in the upper body, drew a gun from his waistband and fired multiple shots in the direction of his assailant, who fled. The teenager's gunfire struck Henson, killing her, according to police.

It was not clear what led to the shooting. Also unknown was whether any connection existed among the victims and whether any were targeted.

- Martin Weil

and Emily Davies

THE REGION

TSA reports increase in gun seizures

Transportation Security Administration officers caught 89 guns at security checkpoints at the Washington region's three major airports last year, an increase of about 24 percent compared with a year earlier.

Officers seized 35 guns at Baltimore-Washington International Marshall, 29 at Reagan National and 25 at Dulles International, TSA said.

The increase in guns confiscated at the region's airports reflects a nationwide uptick in the number of firearms flagged at security checkpoints. More than 6,500 guns were detected at U.S. airports in 2022, up from more than 5,900 that were caught in 2021. Those numbers are significantly higher than the roughly 4,400 guns seized in 2019, the year before the pandemic began.

About 88 percent of the guns caught in 2022 were loaded, according to the TSA.

- Lori Aratani