Metro
Local Digest

424 words
2 January 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Police arrest suspect in 2021 killing of teen

D.C. police have arrested a suspect in the fatal shooting of a 17-year-old high school student who wanted to join the Marines when he graduated and was killed 13 months ago as he walked home from school on a Friday afternoon.

The shooting occurred about 3:40 p.m. Dec. 3, 2021, in the 1700 block of Capitol Avenue NE, a half-mile from the KIPP DC College Preparatory public charter school that Larelle Washington attended and near his residence in the Trinidad neighborhood.

Police said they arrested an 18-year-old man from Southeast Washington on Friday and charged him with first-degree murder.

Authorities said that because the suspect was under 18 at the time of the shooting, he is being charged as a juvenile and his name is being withheld. That also means the arrest affidavit and additional details of the case are not public. Police have not described a possible motive.

At the time of the shooting, Washington's family said they had hired a tutor to help him study for an aptitude test used to match enlistees to jobs in the military. Washington had also met with a recruiter.

Washington had been the second student from the same KIPP school killed in 2021.

- Peter Hermann

MARYLAND

2 found dead, 2 injured in Pr. George's home

Two adults were found dead and two others, including a juvenile, were found injured Sunday morning at a residence in southern Prince George's County, according to authorities.

A police spokesman said the circumstances are under investigation but authorities are not looking for a suspect.

Prince George's County police said officers responded about 6 a.m. to the 2500 block of Lazy Acres Road in Clinton.

Brian Fischer, a department spokesman, said the victims were found inside a residence. Police said an injured adult and juvenile were taken to a hospital. Their conditions were not immediately released. The identities of the people who died have not been made public.

Maj. David Blazer, commander of the Major Crimes Division, told reporters that "there was a gun used on the scene." He did not comment further on the weapon, and he would not say whether anyone had been shot.

Blazer said authorities will await rulings from the medical examiner on how the two adults died. He also said police do not know how the other two victims were hurt or the extent of their injuries.

- Peter Hermann