Metro
Six men on trial in 2018 fatal shooting

Keith L. Alexander 
892 words
17 February 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Donnetta Wilson had just finished doing a client's hair inside her apartment in Northeast Washington when she heard the sound of gunshots and saw one of her windows shatter.

She heard her 19-year-old daughter - who had been sitting in the courtyard outside - scream, she testified Thursday. As she pulled open her front door to see what had happened, a group that included her youngest child, 10-year-old Makiyah Wilson, spilled across the threshold and into the living room.

The 19-year-old had been shot in the arm. Makiyah, who had been struck in the chest, was fatally wounded.

"I was just trying to help her," Wilson said, wiping away tears in D.C. Superior Court.

Wilson was prosecutors' first witness in the trial of six men charged in connection with Makiyah's July 16, 2018, slaying. She testified for less than 20 minutes about the life of the 10-year-old that was cut short.

Prosecutors said in opening statements that Makiyah was the innocent victim of a gang-related attack. The men on trial, they alleged, were part of a violent crew that fired indiscriminately in the courtyard outside Wilson's apartment, seeking revenge on rivals.

Assistant U.S. Attorney Lindsey Merikas summarized the shooting as "50 gunshots, 20 seconds and four gunmen." She said 10 members of the Wellington Park crew had stolen a car and assembled an arsenal of weapons as part of a plot to target those who lived in or were associated with the Clay Terrace neighborhood.

Dozens of panicked people scattered, running and falling to the ground for cover as four gunmen began shooting from the stolen car. Makiyah had been holding her sister's hand just before the gunfire, prosecutors said. Four others were shot and wounded.

Makiyah had turned 10 just two months earlier, celebrating her birthday at Dave & Buster's, her mother testified. Describing her daughter's love of football and basketball, she laughed.

"She wasn't a girly girl. No," Wilson said.

Using social media accounts, text and instant messages, security camera footage and cooperating witnesses, authorities eventually arrested 11 people in connection with the shooting - though only six were on trial Thursday: Quentin Michals, 25, of Southeast Washington; Qujuan Thomas, 24, of Southeast; Isaiah Murchison, 23, of Southeast; Darrise Jeffers, 23, of Southeast; Gregory Taylor, 27, of Southeast; and Marquell Cobbs, 21, of Clinton, Md.

All are facing conspiracy charges or other counts related to Makiyah's death.

Others are expected to face trial later.

Defense attorneys for the men argued that none of their clients were involved in the planning or carrying out of the shooting. They said investigators mistakenly assumed that because their clients were members of a local rap group whose lyrics sometimes referenced violence, they must be violent killers.

Jonathan Zucker, Taylor's attorney, pleaded with the jurors not to allow their emotions over the shooting of a child "cloud" their judgment. He and other attorneys argued that prosecutors had no eyewitnesses, no DNA and no fingerprints linking any of their clients to the shooting.

"My client is a rapper. That's what he does. And he is into the gangster lifestyle, or at least he acts as if he is on social media and in his rap lyrics," Zucker said. "But that does not suggest that just because he raps about a lifestyle means he is a killer."

Added Julie Swaney, Thomas's attorney: "Just because they rapped about these things doesn't mean they actually did them. Just because you are from a certain neighborhood, have family from that neighborhood, doesn't mean you're a criminal."

The trial is expected to last at least through May. The proceedings have been moving at a halting pace, as prosecutors and defense attorneys have squabbled over who should serve on the jury.

Defense attorney Kevin McCants objected to prosecutors' striking six Black people from sitting on the jury, leaving only two Black jurors out of 18 seated to decide the case or serve as alternates.

The racial equity of jurors in D.C. Superior Court has long been a concern among many defense attorneys. The District's Public Defender Service is involved in an ongoing investigation on the jury's racial makeup and whether jurors fairly represent the city's racial demographic.

Federal prosecutor Laura Bach defended the move and bristled that she had specifically sought to stop Black jurors from deciding the case.

"This is not a racial case. Every victim involved, including that little girl, is African American," Bach said, referring to Makiyah.

Judge Robert Okun said McCants's concerns made for "a close call" but determined that the potential jurors were not removed because they were Black. He then ordered the trial to proceed.

The case is one that has long roiled D.C. officials, as Makiyah's face became a symbol of the human toll of gun violence on city streets. Wilson recently settled a 2019 lawsuit that she filed against the District's Housing Authority for not providing adequate security at the public housing complex at the time of her daughter's slaying, said her attorney, Brian K. McDaniel. McDaniel said details of the settlement were sealed.

The trial is scheduled to resume Tuesday.