Metro
Local Digest

508 words
14 May 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Three people fatally shot in three days

Three people were fatally shot since Thursday night in Southeast and Northwest Washington, including a man from Maryland killed early Saturday near the U Street nightlife corridor, according to D.C. police.

In addition, police said a 16-year-old male was shot and critically wounded Saturday morning inside a residence in Southeast Washington. That shooting occurred about 6:30 a.m. in the 2900 block of Knox Place SE. The circumstances were not immediately clear.

The violence comes after Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) convened a public safety summit discussing ways to combat crime with other city leaders and announcing she would propose legislation to make it easier to detain certain arrestees before trial.

As of Friday, homicides in the District were up about 8 percent over this time last year.

Saturday's shooting in the 1300 block of V Street NW occurred about 1:50 a.m., when bars and clubs in the area were still open. Police said they responded to a report of gunfire and found the victim, identified as Calvin Gray, 29, of District Heights in Prince George's County, dead at the scene.

On Friday night, police said Romello Hammond, 23, of Southeast Washington, was shot in the 900 block of Varney Street SE. Police said they responded to calls reporting gunshots and found Hammond about 10:35 p.m. He also died at the scene.

Police said that about 8 p.m. Thursday, a man was fatally shot in the 2300 block of Pennsylvania Avenue SE, in the Fairlawn neighborhood. Police said in a report that his body was found alongside a building that according to public records has apartments and a childhood development center.

That victim was identified as Devonte Maxwell, 30, of Northwest Washington.

- Peter Hermann

VIRGINIA

Falls Church student charged in alleged rape

A student has been arrested and charged with rape in an alleged incident on a school campus in Falls Church, Va., Falls Church police said.

The juvenile was arrested Thursday after an investigation of the report of an incident occurring outside school hours on the Falls Church City Public Schools Secondary Campus, police said.

The accused student was expelled upon report of the incident to school officials, the police said. Police said they began a two-month investigation.

The student was charged with aggravated sexual assault and rape, police said in a statement.

The investigation gave detectives probable cause to believe a second juvenile female had also been sexually assaulted, off campus outside school hours about a month earlier, police said. The suspect was enrolled in the Falls Church system and the victims are enrolled, an official said.

"This is a terrible situation," said Peter J. Noonan, the Falls Church public school system superintendent, adding, "Now is the time to wrap services and support around the victims, their families, and our community."

Falls Church, an independent Northern Virginia municipality, has about 14,000 residents in its 2.2 square miles.

- Martin Weil