Metro
Man and two children, ages 6 and 9, shot exiting Metro bus in Northwest

Emily Davies                Clarence Williams 
466 words
12 January 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B05
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Two young children and a man were shot and injured Wednesday afternoon as they exited a Metro bus in Northwest Washington, according to D.C. police, who said someone opened fire following an altercation involving others on the bus.

The children, 6 and 9 years old, did not have injuries that appeared to be life-threatening, said D.C. Police Chief Robert J. Contee III. One of the injured children was a boy, the other a girl, Contee said.

The man's injuries also appeared to be non-lifethreatening, according to the chief.

The shooting occurred after 4 p.m. following the altercation aboard the 54 Metro bus driving up 14th Street, near Fort Stevens Drive Northwest. Contee said several people got onto the bus, which was full at the time, and began to assault one rider. That fight then spilled onto the sidewalk, where one man brandished a gun and fired shots. The three injured people did not appear to be his targets, Contee said.

After the shooting, the children got back on the bus, which drove up the street, Contee said.

District leaders and community members have expressed outrage at the number of youths shot in D.C. - a number that has soared despite a long list of programs meant to keep children and teenagers safe. Last year in the city, 105 youths were shot, nearly double the number of 2021. Sixteen of them died. On Wednesday, city leaders again called for action.

D.C. Mayor Muriel E. Bowser, speaking beside Contee on the scene Wednesday evening, called the shooter an "idiot with a gun" and said that "we have to have consequences so they are not back in our communities shooting children." Contee said that the children appeared to be coming home from school and were with adults when they were shot.

Police had not made an arrest by Wednesday evening but issued a lookout for a man.

"This is unacceptable. These are two of our kids who were shot," Contee said. "That is very disturbing to me."

Councilmember Janeese Lewis George (D-Ward 4), also at the scene, called for more investment in young people in D.C.

"We have to saturate them in programming, saturate in mentoring, saturate them in emotional health and support," she said. "They need it now more than ever."

This year, two teenagers under 18 were among the first victims of deadly shootings. Martez Toney, 17, was killed Jan. 2 outside a Metro station in Southeast D.C. Thirteen-year-old Karon Blake was killed over the weekend by a man who said he saw the youth breaking into vehicles on a residential street in Northeast Washington.