Metro
Suit alleges federal employee praised Nazism, Hitler at work

Paul Schwartzman 
1,007 words
19 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A supervisor at a federal agency ignored employees' complaints about a co-worker who they allege brought pro-Nazi literature to work and praised Adolf Hitler, according to a lawsuit the employees filed Tuesday in U.S. District Court.

The employees, two of whom still work at the Government Publishing Office and a third who recently departed, contend in the lawsuit that the agency subjected "them to a severe and pervasive hostile work environment," harassment, and discrimination.

The employees allege that a co-worker, Samuel Mewshaw, "made open statements in support of Nazism, Hitler, prominent Nazis and/or anti-Semitic conspiracy theories," the lawsuit asserts. He also "displayed tattoos with known affiliations with Nazism and/or white supremacy" and drew phallic images that he displayed at work, according to the lawsuit filed by Sarah Hurtt and Jonathan Romain, both of whom still work at the agency, and Joshua Crotty, who has departed. Romain is Jewish, according to the lawsuit.

The plaintiffs, who are represented by the Greenbelt-based law firm Joseph, Greenwald & Laake, allege that the agency "failed to take corrective action" despite their complaints to a supervisor, Eric Bohn, who they claim "engaged in open discrimination and/or harassment" and "discouraged" the employees from filing complaints.

Mewshaw, who said he was dismissed from his job at the agency in May, denied the allegations during an interview with The Washington Post. "If they get money out of this, there's a fleecing of the government," he said. "They are lying."

Bohn, when reached by The Post, said he was dismissed from his job in June after 16 years at the agency. The allegations, he said, "came out of left field."

"They never reported anything, they didn't come to me, they didn't go to my supervisor," Bohn said. "There's no record of anything."

Brian Markovitz, a lawyer representing the plaintiffs, said in an emailed statement that GPO "allowed White supremacy, Nazism and other forms of outright discrimination to pollute the workplace that our clients worked in. No one should be subject to that type of discrimination at any workplace, much less in the federal government."

Gary Somerset, GPO's chief communications officer, declined to comment.

The agency, under the direction of Hugh N. Halpern, an appointee of former president Donald Trump, employs about 1,600 workers and is responsible for the production and distribution of printed materials and information products for the federal government.

Hurtt and Romain work as bookbinders at the GPO, where Crotty also was employed until leaving the agency last year. The trio claim in the lawsuit that Mewshaw, Bohn and another GPO employee, Dylan Wingo, also "engaged in frequent, ongoing, open and notorious, unwanted harassment against Plaintiffs."

Among the examples the lawsuit cites, the employees claim that Wingo "stated 'Jews control the entertainment industry' while discussing Kanye West" and "regularly espouses anti-Semitic conspiracy theories." They also allege that Wingo made disparaging comments about Hurtt, including once telling her that she should "strip to earn extra vacation money."

Wingo, who is still employed at the agency where he has worked for 16 years, denied that he spreads antisemitic conspiracy theories even as he acknowledged making the remark about Jews controlling the entertainment industry. But he said he only intended to describe what he believed was West's view. As for his comment about the money Hurtt could earn stripping, he said he was being "sarcastic, not literal," acknowledged that his remark was "in poor taste" and added that he had apologized to her.

Wingo described their department as "diverse" and his relationship with Hurtt as friendly until last fall.

"We've been a family for years. It has been a positive and great place to work," he said. "I was shocked to hear all these things that were said about me."

A preponderance of the lawsuit's allegations are aimed at Mewshaw, who until he left this year had worked at the agency for 17 years. The plaintiffs' list of claims include that Mewshaw recommended that a colleague see the movie "Adolf Hitler: The Greatest Story Never Told" and "openly" displayed "on his desk" a copy of "The Protocols of the Elders of Zion," a book that the U.S. Holocaust Museum describes as "the most notorious and widely distributed antisemitic publication of modern times."

Mewshaw, according to the lawsuit, also sent Crotty text messages in which he expressed support for Nazis such as Wilhelm Boger, Wolfram Sievers and Hitler. The lawsuit alleges that Mewshaw "announced openly in the workplace" that Hitler was "the greatest White man who has ever lived."

Mewshaw, in the interview, said that he was "well-versed" in "The Protocols of the Elders of Zion" and is familiar with the Hitler film, but that he never displayed a copy of it at work or recommended the movie. He also described himself as "a student of history" and acknowledged having books at work, though he said they were "turned upside down so titles could not be seen."

Referring generally to the allegations, he said, "I've worked for the federal government for 17 years. I would not do anything like that. That is an absurd lie. This cost me my career."

The lawsuit alleges that Mewshaw and Crotty had a heated altercation at work on Halloween, during which Bohn sought to separate the two men and ordered Crotty "to leave the workplace."

Crotty, according to the lawsuit, feared returning to work because of potential retaliation and filed a complaint with GPO's senior management and the agency's police department.

Crotty then took a paid leave from the agency, according to the lawsuit. After he had used up his paid leave, Crotty sought administrative leave while the agency "continued to investigate his allegations." The agency declined his request, according to the lawsuit, and Crotty "had no choice other than to accept other employment."

He subsequently left the D.C. area and moved to Connecticut.