Metro
Local Digest

457 words
21 July 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

1 killed, 5 injured inhospital garage crash

One person was killed and five others were injured after a driver crashed into pedestrians in the parking garage of MedStar Georgetown University Hospital on Thursday, according to police, fire and hospital officials.

The incident occurred just after 12:40 p.m. in the parking garage adjacent to the hospital's emergency room, D.C. police said. The hospital is located at 3800 Reservoir Rd. NW.

MedStar spokesperson Marianne Worley said six people were treated for injuries in the hospital's emergency department. One died, two were released and three were still being evaluated, though their injuries were not thought to be life-threatening, she said.

A D.C. police spokesman said all the victims were adults. The circumstances of the crash were not immediately clear. Officials initially said five people were injured in the crash, but a fire department spokesperson later confirmed there were six. D.C. police said a woman was found unconscious and not breathing.

- Emily Davies

Police arrest man in educator's death

A man has been indicted, D.C. police said, in the 2021 fatal shooting of a charter school dean who, according to relatives, was killed while protecting a woman from gunfire in Northwest Washington's Shaw neighborhood.

The victim, 31-year-old Kervin Sanches, had been dean of students at Imagine Hope Community Charter School for elementary- and middle-schoolers in Northeast.

He was shot the night of July 31, 2021, in the 700 block of O Street NW, near the Kennedy Recreation Center. His fiancée has said that a friend told her and relatives that Sanches had pushed a woman out of the way when someone with a gun opened fire on a group of people.

Police said Johnathan Brown, 30, of Northwest Washington, was taken into custody Wednesday. Authorities said he was indicted on a charge of second-degree murder while armed in the shooting.

Brown did not make an appearance Wednesday in D.C. Superior Court, and it could not be determined if he has an attorney.

D.C. police have not commented on the account of the shooting provided by Sanches's family. He was shot around 11:15 p.m. while visiting the neighborhood he grew up in. At the time of the shooting, he lived in Northeast.

Sanches's fiancée, Patrice George, said at the time that Sanches had "fought to live. I knew he fought. He had to make it home to us." She and the family said they based their account on friends who were at the scene of the shooting.

The couple had two sets of twin boys. They had planned to marry in October 2021.

- Peter Hermann