Metro
What happened to Maryland's runaway zebras? Our reporters have some answers.

Katie Mettler                Maura Judkis 
1,122 words
11 November 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Reporters Katie Mettler and Maura Judkis dug into the backstory behind the zebras that went loose in Maryland two years ago. They recently published a story about the owner of the animals, Jerry Lee Holly, reviewing more than 1,000 pages of public records related to his animal businesses.

The records from local, state and federal animal welfare agencies show inspectors chronicled hundreds of alleged animal abuse violations, including citations that led to criminal convictions against Holly. Animal welfare experts told The Washington Post that history should have been clear grounds for termination of his federal license long before his zebras escaped in Maryland, but authorities never shut him down.

Holly was charged and later acquitted of three misdemeanor animal cruelty charges for the escape of the zebras in Maryland. Mettler and Judkis found that the zebra case is at least the sixth time he has faced animal-related criminal charges. The reporters answered questions in a recent Reddit AMA about their story and investigation. This Q&A is an edited and condensed version of the AMA session.

Q: Have there been any specific farm inspections showing abuse? Or has no one actually been to the farm?

A: There have been many, many inspections at Holly's Florida and Maryland farms over the last 20 or so years. Officials at the local, state and federal level in Florida and Maryland had known about Holly's animals (and the mistreatment of those animals) and had just done very little to hold him accountable in any serious way, such as bringing more consequential criminal charges, revoking his licenses or seizing his animals.

Here's a quick by-the-numbers: Records show that from 2011 to 2021, officials with the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the leading oversight agency responsible for enforcing the Animal Welfare Act, cited Holly at least 160 times for alleged violations of that law and Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC) officials cited him at least another 300 times for alleged violations of state animal laws. He was also criminally charged at least six times in cases related to the treatment of his animals.

Q: Does this happen in other states, or is there something about Maryland? The zebra story reminded me of when buffalo escaped from a farm and some zebras ended up trampled to death by buffalo.

A: There's no central authority that tracks the number of zebra escapes, but our research found that this happens maybe once or twice a year, globally. Zebras are smart and they are fast. The biggest difference between those escapes and the Maryland one is that the zebras are usually captured very promptly - almost always the same day they escape. A few notable zebra escapes in recent history:

l2010: A zebra escaped from a circus in Atlanta and was recaptured after a 40-minute police chase down an interstate.

l2015: Another circus zebra escaped in Philadelphia and was recaptured after a 30-minute chase through a Planet Fitness parking lot.

l2019: Two zebras escaped from a circus in Germany. One was recaptured within hours, and the other was killed.

l2020: A zebra was recaptured in 15 minutes (!) after escaping from a circus outside of Paris.

l2023: A juvenile zebra escaped from a Seoul zoo after its parents died, and was recaptured about three hours later.

lBizarrely, 2021 was a BIG year for escaping zebras. In addition to the Maryland zebras, we learned of zebra escapes in Louisiana, Illinois and Tennessee.

Q: Does the federal licensing agency receive reports of state or local animal-related citations and crimes? Is there a threshold that then causes the permit(s) to be revoked? What was the disconnect or issue?

A: We found that there is no central database to track all animal welfare-related violations at the local, state and federal level - meaning all these agencies inspecting the same people for the same violations don't have a concrete system or protocol for communicating with one another about what they are seeing. Experts told us that the USDA - as the federal agency - should be doing more to lead here. Our reporting found that much of the oversight over licensees is reliant upon the discretion of the individual inspectors. But the USDA repeatedly declined to answer most of our questions related to their internal processes. Compounding this, at least in the case of Jerry Holly, is that his license was auto-renewed for two decades under the USDA's old licensing process. In 2020, after years of criticism, the USDA began requiring licensees to pass a compliance inspection to have their permits renewed. When Jerry Holly had his in the fall of 2021, soon after his zebras escaped, he failed. His license was canceled in January 2022.

Q: I'm curious if, as part of your story, you looked into other regional private zoos and caretakers.

A: We didn't include reporting on other regional zoos and caretakers in our story, but we did do lots of Googling and reading.

Also, if you know the name of the owner or the address of the zoo, you can look it up on the USDA's public online search tool.

Q: Do you know what happened to the surviving zebras?

A: For the last two years, we've tried to figure out two things about Holly's zebras. 1) What happened to the escaped zebras? When were they captured and how? And were they captured alive? And 2) What happened to the entire 39-zebra herd that Holly had kept at his Maryland farm, which seemingly disappeared in the fall of 2021?

Unfortunately, we were never able to get a firm answer on any of those questions, even though we asked just about everybody (including Holly many times).

Holly's attorney said in a January 2022 letter to Prince George's County officials that the zebras had left Bellefields (the Maryland farm) but did not indicate their location. The county later executed a second search warrant and found the farm empty. Florida officials said they recently drove by the Micanopy Zoological Preserve (his central Florida farm) and did not observe zebras from the road. The USDA and Holly declined to answer questions about where the zebras went, how they were captured and whether they were caught alive.

After Holly's trial on Oct. 25, Holly and his attorney again declined to answer questions about the whereabouts of the zebras. The attorney would say only that they are "being very, very well cared for" and that Holly is "out of the exotic animal business."

Angel Mendoza contributed to this report.