Metro
Deputy not charged in fatal shooting

Dan Morse 
371 words
9 June 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A Montgomery County sheriff's deputy will not be charged by Maryland prosecutors in the fatal shooting last year of a man who witnesses said came at the deputy while holding up a large kitchen knife, according to an interim report released Wednesday by the Maryland attorney general's office.

The probe centered on a confrontation between Deputy Domenic Mash and Hamed Ghorouni Delcheh on July 20 outside a townhouse in Gaithersburg. At the time, Mash was acting in his capacity as a member of the U.S. Marshals Capital Area Regional Fugitive Task Force. The 10 officers were trying to apprehend Delcheh after authorities alleged he failed to appear in court and tampered with a GPS ankle monitor.

"The available evidence, therefore, supports Deputy Mash's account that Mr. Delcheh came towards Deputy Mash with the knife raised threateningly," the report concluded. "In these circumstances, it is unlikely the state could prove that deadly force was not necessary or disproportionate to the threat posed by Mr. Delcheh."

The task force members weren't wearing body cameras, according to the report. But investigators reviewed part of the encounter captured on surveillance video, and spoke with Mash, five other officers who saw the incident, and two civilian witnesses. Investigators determined the two men were within several feet of each other when Mash fired his weapon eight times, striking Delcheh four times, according to their findings.

Richard Finci, an attorney who had represented Delcheh, called the encounter a tragedy. Delcheh suffered from paranoid schizophrenia and was enrolled in Montgomery County's Mental Health Court, according to Finci.

As such, Delcheh should not have been pursued by a task force designed to go after dangerous fugitives, Finci said. "Having that team get involved in this was excessive," he said. "They may have escalated his behavior."

The FBI also examined the shooting because Mash was part of the federal task force, according to the Maryland attorney general's office.

The attorney general's office said it continues to wait for ballistics analysis from the FBI and will supplement its interim report when it receives the analysis.

The FBI office in Baltimore declined to comment.