Metro
Arlington doctor convicted of sprawling conspiracy to deal pills

Salvador Rizzo 
913 words
13 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

An Arlington County doctor who prosecutors said "flooded" Virginia with more than 1 million oxycodone pills she prescribed over a decade was convicted Tuesday of a drug distribution conspiracy.

Kirsten Van Steenberg Ball testified at her trial in U.S. District Court in Alexandria that she kept prescribing oxycodone to patients who failed drug tests, shared pills with others in violation of criminal laws or neglected to provide documentation that she requested. An undercover FBI agent testified that he kept obtaining oxycodone prescriptions from Ball after all of those lapses.

Despite the red flags she was seeing, Ball said, she worried that her patients needed the oxycodone to manage their pain. Defense attorneys argued that she was "played like a fiddle" by people she trusted. "The patients told me that their pain was very bad and the medication was really helping, so I felt it was appropriate," Ball testified.

Federal prosecutors said Ball, 69, ignored years of warnings from Virginia health regulators and classic signs of drug abuse from patients who were reselling some of their pills. Ball "wildly" overprescribed a powerful painkiller to people who were getting addicted to it and, in some cases, telling her that they were also turning to black-market heroin, prosecutors argued.

"She falsified her records, lied to regulators and lied to the FBI to justify the prescriptions she had written," Assistant U.S. Attorney Katherine E. Rumbaugh said in her closing argument.

Jurors were asked to weigh whether Ball was prescribing the painkillers in good faith for a "legitimate medical purpose in the usual course of professional medical practice." The panel found her guilty of all but one count of oxycodone distribution in a 21-count indictment. Judge Leonie M. Brinkema scheduled sentencing for Feb. 27. Ball faces the possibility of decades in prison.

Before her home office was raided by FBI agents last year, Ball had been reprimanded by Virginia health authorities in 2015 after an investigation into her lax prescribing habits. At her trial, Ball admitted that she did not always follow the best practices she had agreed to after that investigation, such as counting patients' pills and ordering regular drug tests. She admitted that she lied to insurance companies by marking some home visits as office visits on billing forms so that her claims would not be rejected.

Prosecutors in the Eastern District of Virginia offered immunity or the possibility of reduced prison sentences to several of Ball's former patients in exchange for their cooperation in the case.

The doctor denied large parts of an account from her former patient and office manager, Candie Calix, who was sentenced in 2022 to seven years in prison after pleading guilty to an oxycodone distribution conspiracy and whose prison term could be reduced in exchange for her testimony at Ball's trial. Prosecutors said Ball's prescriptions kept Calix and several of her relatives, all of whom shared a home in Front Royal, Va., well stocked with more oxycodone than they could consume. Calix admitted that she sold 30-milligram pills for $25 and 15-milligram pills for $12.50.

In one week in 2019, Ball prescribed more than 700 pills of 30-miligram oxycodone to Calix, far above the recommended dosage set forth by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, "and there is nothing in Ms. Calix's file to justify that," Rumbaugh argued. Ball's sister-in-law and a patient reported to the doctor that they had heard Calix was selling painkillers on the side. Ball testified that she did not believe them because she trusted Calix. According to the trial testimony, when Ball mentioned she was having difficulty gathering the $8,000 or $9,000 she needed for medical malpractice insurance to stay in business, Calix and her family arranged to cover the cost.

An attorney for Ball, Gene Rossi, called Calix "the queen bee of oxy" and said the blame for the drug-dealing conspiracy lay with her and her relatives. He said that Ball was not perfect and "didn't always dot her i's and cross her t's" but that she genuinely cared about her patients, including some she should have dismissed.

"She was played like a fiddle," Rossi said in his closing argument. "Every witness said that. 'She was kind. She was compassionate. She believed me.' That's not a criminal."

U.S. Attorney Jessica D. Aber, whose office prosecuted the case, said in a statement that Ball had prescribed more than 1 million oxycodone tablets with "no regard for patients' safety or where the pills would end up." Ball graduated from the University of Virginia and George Washington University medical school, and had been licensed to practice medicine in Virginia since 2005.

"She blatantly abused legitimate healthcare procedures, despite clear knowledge of the law and warnings from regulatory agencies of the danger her actions posed to patients," Aber said.

The undercover FBI agent testified that while posing as a mover and landscaper who suffered from back pain, he told Ball on several occasions that he would take oxycodone pills that had been prescribed to his father or aunt. Ball told him that was a felony. "I'm not writing that down," she said in a recorded call played in court. "Don't tell anybody else."

"My secret's safe with you," the agent said.

"That's right," Ball responded.