Metro
Local Digest

398 words
7 February 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Man's body found in Rock Creek, police say

A man's body was found early Monday in Rock Creek near Massachusetts Avenue and the U.S. Naval Observatory in Northwest Washington, D.C. police said.

Police said the person may have been involved in a crash, but they cautioned that an investigation is in its preliminary stages.

The D.C. fire department said responders were called to the creek near Massachusetts Avenue and Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway NW about 1:40 a.m. In a statement on Twitter, fire officials said they pulled the body from the creek using a rope system.

Authorities did not say who found the body and reported it to police. The cause of death is pending an autopsy.

- Peter Hermann

Police: Robbers target Canada Goose jackets

The down coat, known for winter warmth, has been the target of robbers here this season, and on Sunday, one was apparently worn by a thief, according to D.C. police.

Taken in an armed robbery at 1:30 p.m. Sunday at 18th and T Streets NW were two Canada Goose jackets, one blue and one gray, according to a police report obtained Monday.

A witness noticed the coat worn by at least one of the robbers.

The robber, police spokeswoman Brianna Burch said, was "definitely wearing a Canada Goose jacket."

A "string of robberies" involving that brand of jacket took place in the past few days, a recent campus advisory from George Washington University said Thursday.

None of the robberies occurred on campus, but two happened near the campus in Foggy Bottom on Wednesday, the advisory said.

The advisory said the "very expensive" Canada Goose jackets "have been taken off" victims. In some cases, the advisory said, weapons were displayed.

The robbery or theft of the Canada Goose jackets appear to be neither new nor confined to the District.

Three years ago, a campus publication at Boston University said that 10 percent of the 180 thefts reported on campus since September involved the theft of winter outerwear.

Of those 18 items taken, eight were said to be Canada Goose jackets.

Among other things, the account said, the jackets are known for the quality of their stitching, their fur-trimmed hoods and a distinctive patch on an arm.

They can retail for more than $1,000.

- Martin Weil