Metro
Police arrest suspect in the killings of man and teen in March

Peter Hermann 
546 words
25 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

D.C. police have arrested a man in the fatal shootings of two people, including a 15-year-old, in Southeast Washington in March, according to police and court documents.

Kevin Foster, 19, of Northeast Washington, was charged with two counts of first-degree murder. Police said he was arrested Thursday by members of the U.S. Marshals Service's Capital Area Regional Fugitive Task Force.

A D.C. Superior Court judge on Friday ordered Foster detained and set a hearing for Jan. 10. Attempts to reach his attorney were not successful.

The shootings occurred about 7:45 p.m. on March 7 in the 2700 block of Bruce Place SE, in Woodland Terrace, and a little later inside a vehicle, according to an arrest affidavit filed in court.

Police said they found two men with gunshot wounds on Bruce Place. One was treated at a hospital, the affidavit says, and Dana Faulkner, 23, of Southeast Washington was pronounced dead on the scene from a shot to the back of his head.

About 10 minutes later, police said, they found the 15-year-old, Abdul Fuller of Southeast, unconscious at Wheeler Road and Mississippi Avenue in Southeast, more than two miles away in Congress Heights. Police said they believe he had been driven there.

Authorities said the teenager also had been shot at close range in the back of the head. Police said he died two days later. Efforts to reach his relatives have been unsuccessful.

Faulkner's grandmother, Mary Faulkner, 69, said in March that her grandson was a new father. "There are so many people getting killed - too many," she said then.

The affidavit says a stolen Hyundai Elantra with four people inside pulled up to Bruce Place on March 7. Three people with guns got out and opened fire, striking two people, including Faulkner.

Someone from Woodland Terrace pursued the Hyundai as its driver sped off, according to the affidavit. At least one witness told police they heard gunfire during the pursuit. Police said they found the Hyundai abandoned near where Abdul was found unconscious. They said a ski mask was also found nearby.

Police said in the affidavit that the Hyundai was in a travel lane and had bullet holes in the trunk and the rear window. The driver's-side rear window was shattered. Police said they found four bullet casings - indications that shots were fired inside the Hyundai - along with bullets embedded in the trunk and the front passenger seats.

In the affidavit, police said the clothes that Abdul was wearing did not match those worn by the three people with guns captured by surveillance video at Woodland Terrace. Police said they believe the teenager had been inside the Hyundai "but did not exit the vehicle and actively participate in the shooting."

The court documents do not describe whether Abdul was struck by a bullet fired from outside or inside the vehicle. A prosecutor wrote in the affidavit that Abdul and Faulkner were killed as part of the same conspiracy - the shooting at Woodland Terrace.

One witness told police that the motive for the initial shooting may have been retribution for previous violence.