Metro
Antiabortion activists' suit against D.C. can proceed, court rules

Casey Parks 
784 words
16 August 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B02
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

The U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit ruled Tuesday that a lower court was wrong to dismiss antiabortion advocates' claims that the city violated their free speech rights when it arrested them for writing a slogan on a sidewalk in 2020.

In August 2020, police arrested Erica Caporaletti, a 22-year-old student at Towson University, and Warner DePriest, a 29-year-old D.C. resident, who were writing "Black Pre-Born Lives Matter" with chalk on the sidewalk outside a Planned Parenthood facility in Northeast Washington. It is illegal for people to write or mark on any public or private property without a permit.

With assistance from the conservative legal group Alliance Defending Freedom, the advocates sued the District that fall, arguing that the city had violated their rights to free speech and equal protection because it allowed others to paint "Defund the Police" and other messages on D.C. streets during Black Lives Matter demonstrations. Lawyers for Caporaletti and DePriest argued the city targeted them because of "the content of the message."

A district court dismissed the lawsuit in 2021. On Tuesday, the appeals court ruled the advocates didn't have an equal protection case but reversed the lower court's ruling on First Amendment grounds, allowing the lawsuit to move forward.

"The First Amendment prohibits the government from favoring some speakers over others. Access to public fora must be open to everyone and to every message on the same terms. The District may act to prevent the defacement of public property, but it cannot open up its streets and sidewalks to some viewpoints and not others," Judge Neomi Rao, a Trump nominee, argued in the opinion. Judge Robert L. Wilkins, an Obama nominee, wrote a concurring opinion.

The larger context of the demonstrations following the murder of George Floyd by Minneapolis police was key to the case. In their suit, the antiabortion advocates argue that city officials allowed other groups to violate the defacement rule without consequence. In the spring of 2020, soon after D.C. Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) commissioned the painting of "Black Lives Matter" on 16th Street NW near the White House, activists began adding their own messages to city property. One group painted "Defund the police" next to Bowser's original declaration, and protesters also covered construction scaffolding outside the Chamber of Commerce with graffiti, murals and photographs. Those protesters were not stopped or arrested, the suit argues, and District officials allowed many of those to remain on public property for months.

Two months after the Black Lives Matter street mural appeared, antiabortion activists led by the Students for Life of America and the Frederick Douglass Foundation planned what they called a campaign to highlight the impact of abortion on Black communities. The activists said they received a D.C. police permit to hold an event and, according to court filings, an officer said he would not prevent them from writing on the asphalt because "he believed Mayor Bowser had effectively opened up the District's streets for political markings."

When the rally began before dawn, though, activists said police warned that they would detain the group if they painted the street. Officers also said the activists could not write on the sidewalk with chalk, group representatives said then.

Caporaletti and DePriest began to write in chalk anyway, and police arrested them. The arrests were captured on video.

The groups filed suit in November 2020, but the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia dismissed the case in September 2021 and said the groups had not "plausibly alleged" that the District had a discriminatory purpose, nor had they sufficiently alleged that the District had a policy of selective enforcement.

On Tuesday, the D.C. Circuit panel found that the antiabortion activists had acted similarly to the Black Lives Matter protesters whose murals remained. Both groups protested around the same time. Both sought to write messages on D.C. streets while officers watched. And both probably violated the defacement ordinance.

"This lopsided prosecutorial response - several arrests for small, chalked pro-life messages and no arrests for widespread 'Black Lives Matter' messages - does not comport with the deterrence value or culpability associated with the number of protesters and the scope of defacement, suggesting improper selective enforcement," Rao wrote.

The antiabortion activists plausibly alleged that the District's selective enforcement constituted "viewpoint discrimination," the court found, and violated their First Amendment rights.

The D.C. government can appeal the 3-0 decision, ask for a full hearing of the appeals court, or go to the U.S. Supreme Court.