Metro
Deputy marshals fatally shoot man in SE

Peter Hermann                Emily Davies 
643 words
1 March 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Two deputy U.S. marshals fatally shot a man whom they saw with a firearm Tuesday afternoon in Southeast Washington as they tried to take him into custody for an alleged parole violation, according to authorities.

The incident occurred about 1 p.m. in the 4300 block of Third Street SE, in a residential neighborhood in Washington Highlands.

D.C. Police Chief Robert J. Contee III said the marshals confronted the man and he fled. The chief said the marshals then saw him with a gun and opened fire, striking him. He did not say whether the man fired shots at the marshals, only that he had "produced" a gun. Authorities later recovered a semiautomatic firearm, Contee said.

Three law enforcement officials familiar with the case identified the man who was slain as 22-year-old Alaunte Scott. Reached by phone, a woman who said she was his mother but spoke on the condition that her name not be used, citing her job, decried the shooting. She said she was too grief-stricken to answer questions.

"My son is dead from a warrant. He posed no harm, and he was fleeing," the woman said.

A D.C. police spokesman said that after the deputy marshals shot the man, they called D.C. officers for help. The spokesman said those officers arrived as the marshals were aiding the wounded man.

The marshals who fired their weapons were not wearing body cameras, an agency spokesman said, though the agency has a pilot program for cameras in some cities. Federal law enforcement has lagged behind local authorities in using such devices.

Authorities said the D.C. officers who helped on the call were equipped with body cameras, and those videos would be reviewed as part of the investigation. D.C. police handle all death inquiries in the District.

Robert Dixon, the U.S. marshal for D.C. Superior Court, where the deputy marshals are assigned, said the slain man had been wanted on a warrant charging him with violating the terms of his parole from a prior conviction.

By 3 p.m., neighborhood children toting brightly colored backpacks began to arrive home from school to the street lined with red brick apartments where the shooting took place.

Tuesday's shooting came less than 24 hours after D.C. police said a man fatally shot himself after an interaction with officers in the Columbia Heights neighborhood of Northwest Washington. That incident occurred about 11:30 p.m. on Monday as police were investigating calls for shots fired in the 1400 block of Park Road NW. The area is near a strip of stores along 14th Street, a block from the Columbia Heights Metro station.

Leslie Parsons, an assistant D.C. police chief who heads the investigative services bureau, said officers found ammunition casings on Park Road but no one who had been shot. He said witnesses provided officers with descriptions of several people thought to have fired the shots.

Officers then saw a man who matched one of those descriptions, Parsons said, and they ordered him to stop several times. The assistant chief said the man refused, and one officer warned that "the individual had a gun in his hand."

At least one officer fired at the man, who ran away, Parsons said. A police spokesman said it was not clear whether the man was struck.

A short time later, Parsons said, officers saw the man in an alley four blocks away, in the 1400 block of Meridian Place NW, "with what appears to be a self-inflicted gunshot wound." Parsons said a firearm was recovered from the scene.

A police spokesman said the man died.

Parsons said that officers had activated their body-worn cameras and that the video is being reviewed.