Metro
Paul aide attack suspect is sent to mental hospital

Keith L. Alexander 
394 words
9 September 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B04
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

The D.C. man charged with stabbing and wounding a staffer for Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) during a random attack this year was ordered to be removed from jail and placed in the city's psychiatric hospital Friday.

D.C. Superior Court Judge Anthony Epstein, citing a four-page forensic report filed by a court-appointed clinical psychologist, said Glynn Neal, 42, must undergo extensive psychological treatment that the D.C. jail is unable to provide. The judge ordered that he be admitted to a 40-day treatment program at St. Elizabeths Hospital.

Neal was charged with assault with intent to kill in the brazen March 25 midday attack, which occurred as the staffer and another man were leaving a restaurant in the H Street corridor in Northeast Washington.

The victim, 26-year-old Phillip Todd, was stabbed multiple times in his head and chest, suffering a brain bleed and a punctured lung. He required several surgeries, federal prosecutors said.

In July, Neal was ordered to undergo psychological evaluations and treatment while he was in custody at the jail. But following a second examination that took place last week, psychologist Teresa Grant determined that Neal remained unable to understand the proceedings in his case and was not receiving the specialized treatment and medication he needed.

"Untreated symptoms of his mental condition are compromising [Neal's] ability to demonstrate a factual and rational understanding of his legal proceedings and the ability to assist counsel at this time," Grant wrote in her report filed with D.C. Superior Court.

Grant also criticized the jail's efforts in treating Neal's psychological problems. Neal, the doctor wrote, "has not received any psychiatric treatment and there has virtually been no change in his presentation."

Grant wrote that she believed that with treatment at the hospital, there was "substantial probability" that Neal could attain competency "in the foreseeable future."

A spokesperson for the D.C. jail declined to comment, citing laws that govern people's medical privacy.

At Friday's hearing, the judge encouraged Neal - who was standing next to his public defender - to work closely with the hospital staff. "We can't go forward until these issues get resolved," Epstein told him.

The next hearing in the case is scheduled for Oct. 27.