Metro
Local Digest

419 words
2 August 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Man, 23, fatally shot in Northwest

A 23-year-old man was fatally shot early Tuesday in Northwest Washington, according to D.C. police.

The shooting occurred about 1 a.m. in the 3100 block of 16th Street NW, between Lamont and Irving streets, along the border of the Mount Pleasant and Columbia Heights neighborhoods.

Authorities identified the victim as Diallo Wright of Northwest Washington. D.C. police said he died at a hospital.

Police have recorded 146 homicides in the District this year, an 18 percent increase over this period in 2022.

On Monday afternoon, police said Russell Wiseman, 44, of Northeast Washington was fatally shot in the 1800 block of West Virginia Avenue NE.

Police said two men were fatally shot in separate incidents Sunday afternoon.

Donald B. Childs, 46, of Northwest Washington was shot about 2:45 p.m. in the 100 block of Farragut Street NW, a residential area just west of Rock Creek Cemetery, according to police.

About two hours later, around 4:45 p.m., Terence Akindo, 24, of Upper Marlboro, Md., was shot in the 2300 block of 13th Place NE, police said. The location is in the Brentwood area, a few blocks east of the Rhode Island Avenue Metro station.

Police announced Tuesday that they had arrested a man in that killing. He was identified as Anthony Lafanta Green, 37, of Upper Marlboro, Md. He was charged with first-degree murder while armed.

An arrest affidavit said the shooting appears to have been over a long-running dispute.

- Peter Hermann

Police arrest man after exchange of gunfire

D.C. police arrested a man Tuesday morning after an officer exchanged gunfire with him along Benning Road in Northeast Washington, according to authorities. Police said no one was injured.

The incident occurred about 5:25 a.m. in the 1700 block of Benning Road NE, a commercial strip that divides the neighborhoods of Kingman Park and Carver-Langston.

Leslie Parsons, an assistant D.C. police chief, said officers responded to calls for the sounds of gunshots and attempted to make contact with a man in the area. Parsons said that the man, "totally unprovoked, produced a firearm and began firing gunshots in the direction of one of our officers."

Parsons said the officer returned fire. He said police arrested the man a short time later inside a building a block away in the 1700 block of Gales Street NE. He said police recovered a firearm.

- Peter Hermann