Metro
Another youth is shot dead in city, fourth in 10 days

Peter Hermann 
1,102 words
29 June 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A 15-year-old boy was fatally shot Tuesday night outside an apartment building in Southeast Washington - marking the fourth youth to be killed by gunfire in the city in the past 10 days.

Jaylin Osborne was killed about 10:30 p.m. as he stood outside the Stanton Road apartment building where he lived with his family, authorities said. The shooting occurred as elected officials were nearing the end of a marathon D.C. Council hearing on a legislative proposal from the mayor to address a surge of violence affecting the District's youths.

"It's just senseless," Jaylin's stepfather, Tarik Revel, 48, said after homicide detectives had left his apartment. "What the hell is going on?"

Mashea M. Ashton, the founder and chief executive of Digital Pioneers Academy, a charter school where Jaylin had just completed the eighth grade and which had already lost three students to gun violence earlier in the academic year, said in a letter to parents that "the city is not safe" and that "it's clear that right now the city is in a crisis."

Jaylin was the 12th juvenile to be fatally shot in D.C. in the first six months of this year, double the figure through this time last year, and the 113th homicide victim in 2023. Violent crime is up 27 percent in D.C., after falling last year, and the city is on pace to top 200 killings for the third consecutive year.

The council hearing - which ended at 11:30 p.m. - was winding down when interim police chief Ashan M. Benedict started receiving text updates about the shooting, which had occurred about five miles away. At the time, Benedict was voicing support for the mayor's proposed legislation that would impose new penalties for gun crimes and make it easier to detain some youths awaiting trial. Several lawmakers appeared opposed to the bill over worries it signaled a retreat to an older style of policing that led to mass incarceration.

"These young people need a lot of help, they really do," Benedict said, adding that residents are traumatized by gunfire, carjackings and robberies. "What are we doing to help them?"

In her letter, Ashton, the school official, described Jaylin as a "bright student and dedicated friend and big brother." She wrote that he was "a hard working and curious scholar who was seen as a leader among his classmates."

She also noted that "once again, we are forced as a [Digital Pioneers Academy] community to grapple with the horrific reality of our city's youth violence epidemic. ... This reality must change." One of the slain Digital Pioneers students, DeMarcos Pinckney, 15, was fatally shot along with his cousin on Father's Day. Another, Antoine Manning, 14, was killed in October, and another, Jakhi Snider, 16, was killed in November. In January, a teacher at the school died after an altercation with police in Los Angeles.

Ashton noted that "violence usually increases in the summer when young people are out unsupervised. That's why I'm making the recommendation that you keep your children indoors in the evening and in supervised activities during the day."

D.C. police said officers were alerted to Tuesday night's gunfire by ShotSpotter, a system that detects the sound of gunshots, and found evidence of a shooting in front of the apartment building in the 2600 block of Stanton Road SE.

They said they found Jaylin wounded in the building's basement and believe he ran there after he had been shot. Revel said his stepson managed to call 911 before he fell unconscious, telling an operator, "I've been shot." Police confirmed that account.

Authorities said Jaylin died early Wednesday at a hospital after suffering multiple gunshot wounds. No arrest has been made, and police said they do not know if Jaylin had been targeted. A police official said the youth had no previous encounters with law enforcement in the District.

Revel said he and his wife, Tiandre Osborne, Jaylin's mother, were at work delivering takeout orders in the NoMa neighborhood when the incident occurred. He said Jaylin collapsed at the door of a friend, who called Jaylin's brother, who called Revel and his wife. Revel said he sped through lights and stop signs, but when he reached Stanton Road, his stepson had been taken to a hospital.

He described Jaylin as shy and said the youth would only venture outside if he was with someone. Revel said Jaylin had gone outside to meet a friend and was to return to the apartment. He said that he did not know if the friend ever showed up but that being outside alone was not something his stepson normally did.

"It don't add up," Revel said, adding that Jaylin did not blindly follow friends he hung out with and would often tell them to go on ahead without him if he suspected mischief. "He tried to stay away from negative influences," Revel said.

At school, Revel said, Jaylin played basketball and football and excelled in academics, earning A's in most subjects and A-pluses in math, his favorite. Revel said Jaylin earned a rare C in gym his final semester, keeping him off the honor roll for the first time in years. He liked math so much that passwords to his personal devices were all long combinations of numbers that he memorized, Revel said.

Revel said that his wife moved to the District from North Carolina several years ago and that Jaylin has four siblings who lived with the family on Stanton Road. During the school year, Revel said, the rule was: "When the streetlights come on, you need to be in the house."

But summer, without the structure of school, is more difficult, Revel said. He said Jaylin wanted one of the 14,000 jobs the city made available through a summer youth program that was touted by the mayor earlier this month, but his stepson missed the March 6 deadline to apply.

Revel said he usually saw Jaylin every day but missed him Tuesday because of their conflicting schedules. On Monday, they passed each other only briefly, as one left the apartment and the other arrived.

Revel said Jaylin asked him if his mother needed any help. "He asked me if she was good. I said, 'Yeah, she's good.'"

Those were the last words the two spoke to each other. And now, Revel said, "We got a funeral to plan."