Metro
Boy fatally stabbed his father, D.C. police say

Peter Hermann                Keith L. Alexander 
971 words
15 November 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Police have charged a 13-year-old boy with fatally stabbing his father inside an apartment building in Northwest Washington, and authorities said the teenager is the youngest person accused in a D.C. homicide this year.

Travis Dash, 41, was found dead about 8 a.m. Sunday on a third-floor landing of a four-story building in the 3100 block of 16th Street NW, in the Mount Pleasant neighborhood, police said. He was pronounced dead at the scene.

According to documents related to the case, reviewed by The Washington Post, authorities charged the boy with five offenses, including first-degree murder while armed, carrying a dangerous weapon and assault with intent to commit murder while armed.

He was charged as a juvenile, and his name was not made public. Police did not comment on a specific motive for the killing, which they described as a "domestic incident." The weapon was a knife, according to the documents, which allege that the killing was committed "purposely" and with "deliberate and premeditated malice."

At a court hearing Monday, a D.C. Superior Court judge found that prosecutors with the D.C. attorney general's office, which handles juvenile cases, had enough evidence to show a "substantial probability" that the youth committed the crimes, the documents show. The judge ordered the teen, who turned 13 three days before the killing, to be held at the city's secure Youth Services Center at least until a hearing set for Thursday.

If found responsible for the killing, the youth could not be ordered held beyond his 21st birthday. The D.C. Public Defender Service, which is representing him, declined to comment on the case.

The District is struggling this year with increased crime involving juveniles, including a rising number of youths being killed or accused of violent offenses, such as carjackings. On Monday, Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) declared youth violence a public emergency.

Police records show that at least eight people age 17 and under have been charged with murder in D.C. this year. A police spokeswoman said the 13-year-old is the youngest. A woman who identified herself as his mother declined to comment Tuesday.

Dash, the victim, was among seven people slain in D.C. since Saturday, adding to a deadly year in which homicides so far are up 33 percent compared with the same period in 2022.

In the latest of these killings, police said 52-year-old Marcus Little was fatally shot about 11:30 a.m. Monday in the 400 block of Ridge Road SE; another man, 24-year-old Emanuel Martinez, died after he was shot about 9:20 p.m. Monday in the 1300 block of Valley Place SE; and a woman was fatally shot about 8:15 a.m. Tuesday in the 1900 block of Minnesota Ave SE. Her name has not yet been released.

Authorities have released few details of Dash's killing, and court records related to his son are filed in juvenile court, where they are not available for public inspection. Police on Monday issued only a brief statement about the incident.

In interviews Tuesday, a cousin and an uncle of the victim questioned the account that the 13-year-old boy's mother gave to police.

According to a police affidavit filed in Superior Court to obtain a search warrant, the mother told detectives that she left the residence Saturday evening and returned Sunday morning. She told police that she waited outside the building and called her 10-year-old son, who was in the fourth-floor apartment, and asked him to accompany her to a grocery store, according to the affidavit.

The mother told police that her 10-year-old called her a few minutes later and said he had found his father on a third-floor landing, and that he was bleeding and appeared unconscious, the affidavit says. The mother told police that she went inside, found Dash and called 911.

One of her children told police that his mother and Dash had been arguing in the apartment Sunday morning, the affidavit says. It says the child told police that he "overhead the decedent and [the woman] fighting."

Police said in the affidavit that surveillance video shows Dash stumbling out of a fourth-floor apartment about 7:30 a.m. and falling down the stairs. The affidavit does not describe what happened inside the apartment. Police said they took photographs, DNA swabs and found suspected drug paraphernalia inside.

The affidavit says Dash was the biological father of three of the woman's children, including the 13-year-old charged with killing him. Police said there was a "significant history of domestic violence" but did not elaborate.

The mother told police that Dash did not have a permanent residence but made frequent, unexpected visits to her and their three children. But Dash's cousin and uncle said he lived in the apartment.

The uncle, Aaron Dash, 59, said he thinks his nephew was left dying in the third-floor hallway for a half-hour, based on the time police said that he was seen stumbling out of the apartment and when 911 was called. He said his nephew loved his children but had no job and struggled to take care of his family. He said he hadn't seen his nephew in years, nor has he met the children.

The cousin, Ericia Thompson, 43, said the 13-year-old boy's mother called her as police were responding to the scene. Thompson said she headed to the apartment building.

Thompson said she last saw her cousin last spring. They exchanged their usual greeting: "Love you, cuz."

Emily Davies contributed to this report.