Metro
11-year-old is again arrested in robbery after having earlier charges dropped

Keith L. Alexander 
662 words
20 July 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

In early June, D.C. prosecutors dismissed criminal charges against a notable offender: an 11-year-old who police alleged was responsible for an assault and two robberies the previous month, documents show.

But the youth, who agreed to stay out of Northwest Washington and wear an ankle monitor if a probation officer determined it was necessary to resolve the charges, didn't stay out of the court system for long. On Wednesday, he appeared virtually in court again - in connection with another robbery.

On June 16, 11 days after documents show the youth's prior charges were dismissed, he was arrested on charges of armed robbery and carrying a pistol without a license. According to a police report, he and two others tried to steal a delivery driver's moped that was parked outside a Chick-fil-A in Northwest Washington, then threatened to shoot the driver when he objected. A D.C. prosecutor said at Wednesday's hearing that the office was "working on a possible plea" offer with the youth related to the new charges, which include robbery while armed, threats to injure a person and carrying a pistol without a license.

A spokeswoman for the D.C. attorney general's office, which prosecutes juvenile cases in the city, declined to comment on the case, citing laws that prohibit officials from disclosing details of cases involving youths. But the office said in a general statement that it "prosecutes all serious and violent crimes committed by juveniles, including carjacking and armed robbery, where we have the evidence needed to do so."

The Washington Post generally does not name those charged with crimes as juveniles and was allowed to attend the hearing Wednesday on the condition that the youth's identity not be revealed.

According to a police report, the youth and two others grabbed the food delivery driver's moped at about 5 p.m. from outside the Chick-fil-A in the 3100 block of 14th Street NW and began pushing it eastbound in the 1300 block of Irving Street NW. Describing security footage reviewed by detectives, the report alleges the owner of the moped ran after them.

"It's mine, please. I'm working," the owner is heard saying, according to the report.

"Come get your moped. It's right there," the youth responds.

According to the report, the moped's owner is soon seen with his hands in the air "in a surrender style gesture," and the youth runs after him, clutching his waistband.

"If you don't move out of the way, I'm going to shoot you," the youth says, according to the report.

The moped driver summoned police, who found the youth and another suspect wearing the same clothes as the people they saw in the security videos, according to the report. The victim identified that youth and another suspect as the people involved in the incident.

During a brief hearing Wednesday in D.C. Superior Court, the youth, his attorney, his probation officer and a prosecutor with the attorney general's office appeared virtually before Judge James Crowell. A probation officer said the youth, who has been released into his mother's custody, was compliant with his curfew, but there had been "issues" with his GPS bracelet. The probation officer said the youth's mother was concerned about her son's drug use, and the officer asked that he undergo drug testing.

Crowell said he was "concerned" about the youth's issues with his GPS monitor. "If things don't improve, I will have to modify his placement. If things don't get better, I will have to place him in a shelter," the judge told the youth's probation officer and his attorney.

A follow-up hearing was scheduled for Sept. 5. Calls to the youth's attorney after the hearing were not returned.