Metro
At least 5 killed, 6 wounded in spate of D.C. shootings

Moriah Balingit                Peter Hermann 
637 words
3 September 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A string of nine shootings across the District left five people dead and at least six others wounded in a time span from Friday afternoon to late Saturday afternoon.

The shootings come amid a worrisome surge in violence in the District. As of mid-August, shootings in the city were up 20 percent, and the number of homicides was up 27 percent from the same period last year. Among the victims in the recent shootings were three juveniles - including a 15-year-old, Zyion Turner, who was fatally shot early Saturday. Zyion is the 14th person under the age of 18 to be killed in the District this year.

The upswing in youth victims of gun violence tracks with a devastating national trend. Guns killed a record 4,572 children and teens under the age of 20 in 2021, according to a recent analysis, making it the leading cause of death for that age group. That's an increase of more than 42 percent from 2018.

The deadliest recent shooting unfolded Friday night in Shaw, just minutes before midnight. Police were called to the 1300 block of Seventh Street NW, near the Kennedy Recreation Center, where they found 19-year-old Mikeya Ferguson, 18-year-old Cle'shai Perry and an unidentified teenage girl shot in a parking lot in the back of a building near O Street, police spokesman Paris Lewbel said.

All three were taken to the hospital, where the two women died. The teenager remained in critical but stable condition Saturday afternoon, Officer Sean Hickman said.

Rachelle Nigro, an advisory neighborhood commissioner, took a video of the scene, calling it "a horrific situation."

The spate of shootings started Friday afternoon at 1:45 p.m. D.C. police said 32-year-old Mannin Quarles was fatally shot in the 5100 block of Astor Place SE, near Marshall Heights and the Capitol View neighborhoods.

On Friday evening, police said a person in their late teens was shot and critically injured in the 2200 block of Savannah Terrace SE, in the Shipley neighborhood. The 17-year-old was in critical but stable condition Saturday, Hickman said.

Shortly after 11 p.m., police responded to a report of a shooting in the 100 block of Farragut Street NW. There, they found 43-year-old Richard Ruffin III, of Silver Spring, shot. He was pronounced dead at the scene.

Later, right around the time police were responding to the shooting in Shaw, another shooting was reported in the 700 block of 32nd Street SE. And shortly after 2 a.m. Saturday, police said gunfire erupted in the 5000 block of First Street NW. The victims in those shootings survived.

Four hours later, police were called to a home in the 4200 block of Fourth Street SE for a report of another shooting, where they found Zyion, the 15-year-old. He was pronounced dead at the scene.

The violence continued Saturday afternoon. At around 1:30 p.m., police reported a shooting in the 3500 block of Jay Street NE. Another shooting was reported around 5:15 p.m. near the 1800 block of P Street SE, Hickman said.

He said the man who was shot on P Street was conscious and breathing.

Police have made no arrests in the recent shootings. However, the department announced Friday that it had arrested 18-year-old Jaleil Jones in the death of 44-year-old Robert Lavender. Jones is charged with first-degree murder while armed.

Lavender was found shot the night of July 17 in the 600 block of Monroe Street NE, adjacent to Catholic University's campus. He was pronounced dead at the hospital.

Martin Weil contributed to this report.