Metro
Girl dead, father injured in shooting

Dana Hedgpeth                Jasmine Hilton 
343 words
14 May 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C07
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A shooting inside a home Wednesday night in Prince George's County left a teenager dead and her father critically wounded, authorities said.

The girl was identified Thursday as 17-year-old Nia Johnson of District Heights. Detectives are investigating the shooting, including who was armed and the motive, police said in a news release.

According to an initial investigation, the incident appears to be domestic-related, and police said they do not believe there are any outstanding suspects.

The incident happened around 9:35 p.m. in the 1800 block of Tanow Place in District Heights, Md. Officers responded to a report of a shooting and found the father and daughter when they arrived at the house, police said. Johnson was found with gunshot wounds and later died at a hospital.

Her father was found with a gunshot wound, and his injuries are life-threatening, according to police.

Johnson was a 12th-grade student at Oxon Hill High School, according to a letter signed by the principal of the high school Thursday.

"For those of you who knew Nia, we ask that you remember and celebrate her love of reading, writing, and cooking," said Mar-c Holland. "For those of you who did not know Nia, we ask that you respect our sadness and support us with your understanding."

The police department is consulting with the Prince George's County State's Attorney's Office to determine whether charges will be filed, according to police.

On Thursday morning, the police tape and officers that surrounded the neighborhood the night before were gone. It was quiet, an atmosphere that neighbors said was the norm.

"Never seen that, not 'round here," said Timothy Howell, 57, who has lived in the neighborhood for seven years. He said the community is made up of mostly seniors and that he had never heard gunshots in the area.

A person who identified themselves as a relative of Johnson's Thursday morning declined to comment.