Metro
Centreville woman gets prison in fentanyl death

Salvador Rizzo 
483 words
21 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A Northern Virginia woman who continued selling illicit painkillers laced with fentanyl after learning that one of her customers had just died of an overdose was sentenced Friday to 2 1/2 years in federal prison.

Roshanda Graham, 44, of Centreville, worked as a bartender in Leesburg and admitted that she would supply customers and acquaintances with counterfeit Percocet pills stamped "30" or "Perc." She pleaded guilty in June in U.S. District Court in Alexandria to conspiring to distribute fentanyl. Prosecutors said she was seeking "to make quick money" and turn a "profit off the opioid crisis." The restaurant where she worked is not identified in court papers.

Prosecutors said fentanyl overdose deaths have skyrocketed in Virginia, "jumping to 1,659 deaths in 2020, and 2,038 deaths in 2021," according to Drug Enforcement Administration data. U.S. Attorney Jessica D. Aber of the Eastern District of Virginia, whose office prosecuted the case, said in a statement that fentanyl fatalities increased again in 2022, to at least 2,500, citing preliminary data from the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner of Virginia.

"Counterfeit pressed pills are incredibly dangerous because their appearance provides a false sense of security and there is no way to know how much fentanyl is contained in each pill," Aber said. "A minuscule amount of fentanyl, as small as the sharpened tip of a pencil, can result in a fatal overdose."

In December 2020, a Leesburg couple bought six counterfeit pills containing fentanyl from Graham and chocolate bars containing psilocybin mushrooms, court records show. The husband overdosed and died in the hospital days later from accidental oxycodone and fentanyl intoxication, according to a medical examiner's report.

His widow then began to cooperate with law enforcement officials. During a phone call with the widow in February 2021, Graham brought up the husband's death and said, "I feel horrible," according to her guilty-plea documents. Then, after the widow asked about painkillers, Graham agreed to supply her "with the same type of pills, from the same supplier," prosecutors said. Graham continued to sell the counterfeit pills, including to undercover officers, court records show.

Graham's attorney, Ryan Campbell, requested a sentence of time served, dating to her arrest in June. Federal prosecutors requested a prison term of two years and nine months. Judge T.S. Ellis III imposed the 2 1/2 -year sentence.

Graham's family members wrote in letters to the court that she had been abused as a child and that the death of her mother and the coronavirus pandemic weighed heavily on her. "Although she was aware of [the victim's] death, she was not expressly aware of the cause," Campbell wrote in a court filing, adding that Graham was not aware that "the pills she later distributed to [the widow] contained Fentanyl."