Metro
Arrest is made in FBI agent carjacking

Peter Hermann                Martin Weil 
712 words
7 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

An off-duty FBI agent who was robbed of a bureau vehicle in a carjacking in D.C. last week described being knocked to the ground and looking up to see a young man pointing a handgun at her, according to a police affidavit filed in court.

The new details, made public after police arrested a 17-year-old suspect, describe the unidentified woman as suffering a cut lip while wrestling with the gunman over the keys to an FBI-registered blue Chevrolet Malibu.

The Nov. 29 attack occurred at midafternoon in the 100 block of 12th Street NE, a residential area near Lincoln Park. Police said the agent relinquished the keys as the teenager grabbed them. Police said the teen grabbed the agent's FBI-issued cellphone, and he and an accomplice drove off with the vehicle.

Authorities said in the affidavit, filed in D.C. Superior Court, that they tracked the phone and found it and the vehicle abandoned about a half-mile away. Some FBI property was recovered from the vehicle, but police said FBI-issued ammunition was missing from the trunk.

The affidavit says police collected surveillance video and were able to track the suspected gunman's movements over the course of several days in different parts of the District. A person later texted police with an anonymous tip identifying the 17-year-old, who was arrested Monday at his residence in the Benning Ridge area of Southeast Washington, the affidavit says.

Devonta Lynch was charged as an adult with armed carjacking, armed robbery and using a firearm in a crime of violence, according to a criminal complaint. A Superior Court judge on Tuesday ordered Lynch detained and set a hearing for Monday.

Efforts to reach Lynch's attorney were not successful. A woman who identified herself as Lynch's mother declined to comment when reached by The Washington Post on Wednesday.

The carjacking of the agent was one of 925 committed in the District this year, a 107 percent increase year-to-date from 2022. Victims include a congressman who was carjacked in October in front of his apartment building in the Navy Yard area of Southeast.

Police said in the affidavit that in the Nov. 29 carjacking, the agent was attacked as she stood next to the open driver's door while zipping up her coat. Police said she became disoriented but recalled the gun being pointed at her.

"Give me your keys. Give me your keys," the agent said the young man demanded, according to the affidavit.

The affidavit says the agent could not provide police with a description of the assailants. Police said the armed attacker was wearing a blue-gray ski mask, but it was on top of his head, exposing his face.

After getting the keys and the phone, police said the gunman got into the driver's seat and another person got into the front passenger seat. The vehicle was found a short time later in an alley in the 1000 block of 15th Street SE, near the Potomac Avenue Metro station. A police surveillance camera positioned there recorded video of the occupants getting out of the Malibu and running away, the affidavit says.

Investigators with the FBI and D.C. police reviewed surveillance video from streets and outside schools and apartment complexes to map the precise route of the stolen vehicle and the later movements of the suspected gunman. The affidavit says the occupants were seen on video rummaging through the vehicle's trunk.

On Saturday, the tip with the Lynch's name was texted to the D.C. police Command Information Center, through a tip line, according to the affidavit. Police contacted Lynch's school and were told that he had been suspended on the day of the carjacking, the affidavit says. Investigators then got a warrant to search his residence.

Police said that in Lynch's bedroom they found a paintball gun, a gun magazine used to hold bullets and black Nike boots that resembled what the gunman was reportedly wearing during the carjacking, according to the affidavit.

In a utility closet, police found two 50-count boxes of FBI-issued ammunition, the affidavit says.