Metro
Local Digest

414 words
27 August 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Police officer convicted of PPP loan fraud

A D.C. police officer was convicted Friday of defrauding a pandemic disaster relief program of at least $18,350.

A federal jury found Roberto Adams guilty of wire fraud and money laundering in a scheme to obtain Paycheck Protection Program loans, the U.S. attorney's office for the District of Columbia said in a news release.

Prosecutors said Adams formed a business called SuperKlean in June 2020, after the coronavirus had caused much of the United States to go under lockdown. Then he applied for PPP loans on behalf of the business, which he claimed performed janitorial work but which prosecutors said had no employees, clients or income.

Adams, 36, of Hyattsville, Md., spent the loan proceeds at casinos in Maryland and at hotels and casinos in Las Vegas, as well as on airfare and high-end sneakers, prosecutors said. He also spent $12,110 of the stolen relief funds to pay several months of back rent on his home, they said.

Adams, who has not yet been sentenced, faces a maximum of 30 years in prison for wire fraud and 10 years for money laundering, the U.S. attorney's office said. His lawyers did not immediately respond Saturday to a request for comment.

Soon after his August 2021 arrest, Adams was suspended without pay from the D.C. police department, which he joined in 2015. He had patrolled the 5th District. Now that his trial is over, MPD will complete an internal investigation into the matter, police spokesperson Paris Lewbel said in a statement.

- Steve Thompson

MARYLAND

One dead after vehicle crashes into apartment

One person was killed early Saturday after a vehicle crashed into an apartment building in Laurel, police said.

The vehicle left the road near the 800 block of Kay Court, crossed a grassy area and crashed into the brick building, television news footage of the scene showed. Officers arrived about 2 a.m. and found a male with injuries inside the vehicle. They attempted aid, but he was ultimately pronounced dead at the scene, police said.

The driver was treated for serious injuries at a hospital, but he is expected to survive, police said.

Police did not immediately release the victim's identity, pending notification of his family. Officers ask anyone who may have witnessed anything regarding the crash to email LPDtips@laurel.md.us or call 301-498-0092.

- Steve Thompson