Metro
Firefighter dies battling Leonardtown home blaze

Dana Hedgpeth                Peter Hermann 
348 words
28 June 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A firefighter died early Tuesday after he became trapped while fighting a blaze at a home in Leonardtown in St. Mary's County.

Patrick Gordon, a spokesman for Naval Air Station Patuxent River, said the firefighter was with the Naval District Washington Fire Department, one of several agencies that responded to the fire on Deer Wood Park Drive.

He "sadly died in the line of duty," Gordon said. The firefighter's name was not released.

At a news conference Tuesday, Wayde Peaper, a battalion fire chief with the Naval District Washington Fire Department, said that the call came about 4:30a.m. and was initially for an alarm but that neighbors said they saw fire.

Peaper said the fallen firefighter became trapped, and the home collapsed. Other firefighters were unable to rescue him.

"We lost a true hero this morning," said Capt. Derrick Kingsley, commanding officer of Naval Air Station Patuxent River. He "went in without hesitation to save others and lost his own life in the process."

One other firefighter was injured, officials said.

The Naval District Washington Fire Department is part of Naval Air Station Patuxent River, officials said, and sometimes helps to respond to incidents in the Southern Maryland area.

In a statement posted on social media, the naval air station called it a "tragic loss" and said, "our thoughts and deepest condolences go out to his family, friends, and loved ones during this incredibly difficult time."

The cause of the fire remains under investigation, officials said. The Maryland Office of the State Fire Marshal said in a tweet that 15 of its investigators - a quarter of its personnel - were involved.

Early Tuesday afternoon, the fire marshal's office tweeted that investigators "continue to comb through the remains of the home" and said it would be an "extended operation."

Several agencies, including the Baltimore office of the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives and fire departments with Prince George's and Anne Arundel counties, were also assisting in the investigation.