Metro
Teen pleads guilty in fatal May shooting of 18-year-old at Wheaton Metro

Dan Morse 
611 words
31 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A 16-year-old from Maryland who shot another teenager in the head on the Wheaton Metro platform pleaded guilty to first-degree murder and faces up to 40 years in prison, according to Montgomery County Circuit Court proceedings late last week.

The shooting, during an evening rush hour seven months ago, stunned residents and judges alike. "A sad state of affairs as to what's going on," District Judge Holly D. Reed said at the time. "You have juveniles committing violent crimes with guns, killing one another."

The defendant, Emmanuel L. Simmonds, remains at the Montgomery County Detention Center. He is expected to return to court on June 28 for sentencing. The teen he killed, Tenneson Vaughn Leslie Jr., 18, had experienced tragedy in his life - his father was stabbed to death in 2019 in his native Bahamas and, four years before that, his mother died after a long illness, according to relatives.

"They were always on his mind," Tasheka Graham, an aunt, said in an earlier interview.

In court Thursday, Montgomery County Assistant State's Attorney Cortenous Herbert presented allegations against Simmonds that Herbert said would have been proved at a trial.

On May 18, at about 5:50 p.m., police were called to the Wheaton Metro station about a shooting. They found Leslie, unresponsive, on the train platform at the bottom of an escalator, Herbert said. An investigator reviewed surveillance video that recorded what happened.

"What she saw was two groups of young males separately descending an escalator. At some point on that ride down the escalator, a physical altercation erupted," Herbert said, adding that one of the young men could be seen on the video pulling out a gun.

"The victim, Tenneson Leslie, is then seen running away from the escalator - at which point the male with the gun can be seen pointing it at the victim, shooting him once in the back of the head," Herbert said. "And at that point, the victim falls face first onto the Metro platform."

The suspect with the gun was wearing a hooded sweatshirt bearing the words "Bad Habits But Good Intentions," according to court records.

Simmonds's attorney, Paul Zmuda, said he expects his client will speak in court in June about his deep sorrow over the incident. "He's a 16-year-old struggling with a lot of learning disabilities and mental health issues," Zmuda said. "It's a sad story for everybody involved."

Since being locked up in May, Simmonds has taken classes behind bars and is progressing in school better than he had been, according to Zmuda. The attorney had asked that the sentencing take place in June because he hopes by then to show the judge his client completed the 11th grade. "He's doing well there," Zmuda said.

Zmuda said he hopes his client will be sent to a Maryland prison geared for young offenders, which could have him released on parole before the 40-year cap in the case.

"It's still jail," Zmuda said. "But they have programs specifically for young offenders - much more of a focus on treatment and rehabilitation."

Montgomery County's top prosecutor, State's Attorney John McCarthy, described the killing as coldhearted.

"This was a shockingly brazen, callous act by a young offender," he said. "The defendant executed a young man on a crowded Metro platform, not only claiming one innocent life but placing many other people at risk as there were other citizens, simply using the Metro system that easily could have been struck by a bullet."