Metro
D.C. transit agency sued for barring religious group's ads

Fiona Andre 
892 words
16 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B02
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

The American Civil Liberties Union filed a lawsuit in U.S. District Court against the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority over its refusal to display ads for a religious group because WMATA says the ads violate its advertisement guidelines.

The ACLU said the agency's advertisement policy discriminated against certain opinions in violation of the First Amendment, according to the complaint filed Tuesday.

"We don't understand why there should be a ban on religious advertisements. Religion is, after all, a point of view about the world," said Arthur Spitzer, senior counsel at the ACLU of the District of Columbia.

This summer, the religious nonprofit group WallBuilders sought to display ads on city buses in D.C. The intended campaign included four ads featuring paintings of foundational moments in American history and inviting the public to visit the WallBuilders website to learn more about the religious significance of the events portrayed.

One ad showed Henry Brueckner's painting of George Washington kneeling in prayer at Valley Forge; a message in bold white letters at the bottom asked: "Christian? To find out about the faith of our founders, go to WallBuilders.com." Another ad used the painting "Signing of the Constitution" by Howard Chandler Christy, adding a QR code for the WallBuilders' website at the bottom right corner and including the organization's logo.

WMATA said the ads violated resolutions No. 9 and No. 12 of its guidelines on commercial advertising. The two guidelines prohibit the display of ads that "influence members of the public regarding an issue on which there are varying opinions" and that "promote or oppose any religion, religious practice or belief."

Although the organization's religious beliefs are clearly stated on its website, the ads did not express any religious views, the ACLU's Spitzer said.

The Texas-based nonprofit asserts that the Founding Fathers never intended to separate the church from the state and wanted to create a Christian nation. Its website presents the group as a "national pro-family organization" and offers to revisit the "moral, religious, and constitutional foundations" of American history.

David Barton, named one of the nation's 25 most influential evangelicals in 2005 by Time magazine, founded the organization in 1989. Barton is the author of "The Jefferson Lies," a book that purports to disprove myths about Thomas Jefferson. In the book's abstract, the Founding Father is described as "a man who revered Jesus, a classical Renaissance man and a man whose pioneering stand for liberty and God-given inalienable rights fostered a better world for this nation and its posterity."

The book became a bestseller but was pulled from distribution by its publisher after historians debunked numerous details in it.

David Barton's son, Tim Barton, now runs the organization.

The nonprofit is represented by the ACLU, the First Liberty Institute and the Steptoe law firm.

The ACLU and the First Liberty Institute have represented clients on opposite sides several times in the past, Spitzer noted. The two organizations collaborated on this lawsuit to show the court that it was not a "partisan issue, but really an issue of free speech for everybody," he said.

The plaintiffs denounced what they called a double standard in the agency's ad guidelines, saying it has authorized ads on controversial topics in the past despite its policy. They pointed to ads run in 2017 by the transit agency for the Broadway musical "The Book of Mormon," a satirical play about Mormon culture, and to ads run for the Brennan Center for Justice demanding limits on Supreme Court terms.

Since 2015, the transit agency has amended its ad policy to ban political, religious and advocacy ads. The decision was a response to an ad campaign by the American Freedom Defense Initiative that was judged to be Islamophobic. The cartoon ad showed the prophet Muhammad wearing a turban and waving a sword while claiming, "You can't draw me," to which an artist was depicted replying, "That's why I draw you!"

Since then, the agency has been involved in numerous lawsuits. In 2017, the ACLU filed suit on behalf of itself, Carafem, Milo Yiannopoulos and PETA, all of which had the experience of their ads being rejected by the transit agency: Carafem for an ad for abortion pills; Yiannopoulos, a conservative writer, for one of his books; and the animal rights group PETA for its Go Vegan campaign. The ACLU also is a party in the pending suit challenging the transit agency's decision not to run its ads showing the First Amendment text in English, Spanish and Arabic.

In November 2017, the Archdiocese of Washington sued the transit agency after it rejected the archdiocese's ads showing Christmas scenes and inviting the public to attend Christmas Mass and donate to Catholic charitable groups. The transit agency said the ads violated resolution No. 12 of its guidelines, that prohibiting ads promoting or opposing religious beliefs. The court ruled in favor of the transit agency in a decision upheld by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit. The archdiocese has appealed the decision to the Supreme Court.

WMATA did not respond to Religion News Service's request for comment in time for publication.

- Religion News Service