Metro
D.C. homicide count continues to climb

Peter Hermann 
1,112 words
28 September 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B02
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Brittany Malloy offered to drive her son to school Tuesday. The 16-year-old laughed, telling her he would rather join his friends taking the Metro to Dunbar High in Northwest Washington.

Maurice Jackson Jr., a junior interested in entrepreneurship and architecture, called his mother as classes wound down later that afternoon. "He told me he was on his way home," she said.

Another phone call followed, from an acquaintance, and Malloy, a 32-year-old cosmetologist and nurse, said she soon learned that her only son had been shot moments after he left Dunbar, less than two blocks from the school's front doors.

Jackson died at a hospital a short time later, leaving another D.C. mother freighted with misery - at once grieving the loss of a child, feeling angry over the continued violence, questioning the policies of those who govern the city and asking how illegal firearms can be so commonplace on the streets of the nation's capital.

Malloy said that "not in a million years" did she think violence would impact her family, that one day her mother - the victim's grandmother - would be in the back of a police car steps from where a loved one had been shot, the grandmother's sorrowful cries of "Oh my God" reaching bystanders halfway down a block.

"Muriel needs to do better," Ericka Malloy, 51, said Wednesday, referring to D.C. Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D). After learning her grandson had been shot, she rushed to New Jersey Avenue and P streets NW, where she said an officer guided her to a cruiser to console her. Jackson had been taken to a hospital.

"I was saying, 'God, please don't let him die.' I was begging. I was praying," she said.

Jackson was one of two people killed in shootings Tuesday, 62 minutes and six miles apart. D.C.'s homicide count has now surpassed 200 at the earliest date in any year since 1997.

The other slaying occurred in Southeast Washington's Congress Heights neighborhood, where police said a bystander, 21-year-old Kamal Jones of Southeast, was gunned down when people in two vehicles opened fire on each other on Savannah Street SE.

In a brief interview, Jones's aunt Ikisha Payne said her nephew was walking to a grocery store when he was shot. She said he had two jobs, including one as a cook, and was a student at a university in Maryland. "He was an outstanding person," Payne said.

D.C.'s current year-to-date homicide total is 35 percent higher than the figure at this time in 2022.

On Tuesday, acting police chief Pamela A. Smith said a recent review found eight homicide cases that had not been included by the department in this year's official count. Those victims include a man who was shot in 2017 and died this year, a woman who police initially believed had taken her own life, and two infants who police said were killed by blunt force trauma - a 7-month-old boy in Southeast Washington and a 5-month-old boy in Northwest Washington.

The addition of those cases pushed the year-to-date total to 209 - or six more homicides than in all of 2022.

Jackson's killing brought to 19 the number of people under age 17 who have been slain in D.C. this year, and he was the second 16-year-old to be killed this week. Jamal Jones was shot Monday afternoon in Anacostia.

On Wednesday, at a confirmation hearing for Smith, D.C. Council member Kenyan R. McDuffie (D-At Large) said he visited Dunbar to talk with students grieving the loss of their classmate.

"It was hard to look some of the young folks in their eyes," he said, "and tell them it was going to be okay."

McDuffie said their trauma reminded him of what he experienced growing up in Washington in the 1980s and 1990s, including during the crack epidemic, when the city's yearly homicide totals regularly topped 400 and peaked at nearly 500 in 1991.

He called on Smith to acknowledge that "the point we are today, with more than 200 homicides … is unacceptable" and to develop a plan to better integrate police officers in the communities they serve.

Jackson was shot at 3:46 p.m. in the 1400 block of New Jersey Avenue NW, around the corner from Dunbar, and on the border of Truxton Circle and Shaw, two neighborhoods undergoing rapid gentrification but still impacted by violence.

Police said that Jackson encountered a group of people after he left school and that someone took out a gun and fired multiple times, striking him. It was not clear whether he had been targeted. Jackson's relatives said they knew of no problems he had at school or in the community.

Jackson lived with his mother off Rhode Island Avenue NW. She described her son as sometimes quiet but always attentive to his cousins and to his maternal and paternal grandmothers.

"He was such a sweet kid," she said, adding that he liked to watch old movies, eat steak and broccoli, and travel. He recently visited relatives in South Carolina, attended a family wedding in Pennsylvania and took a trip with cousins to Puerto Rico, his first time on an airplane, family members said. He went to a theme park in New Jersey for his 16th birthday.

Jackson's grandmothers, Ericka Malloy and 60-year-old Donita Jackson, said the teen visited them often to help with chores. The grandmothers said they took Jackson out of the city to help him see places beyond D.C., though Donita Jackson said he did comment that North Carolina "was too slow and quiet," missing the noises and commotion of a city.

Relatives said police have told them little about what happened Tuesday afternoon.

Bowser, answering reporters' questions after an unrelated event in Southeast Washington, said the city needs more police officers to reverse a half-century low staffing level. She also called for tougher judicial measures for people committing crimes and stepped-up intervention to prevent "interpersonal conflicts that lead to gunfire and death."

Donita Jackson demanded quick action. "We're tired of being tired," she said, adding of the violence: "This needs to stop. This has to stop."

Ericka Malloy recounted her last conversation with her grandson.

"He would always tell me, 'Grandma, relax.' I told him that I loved him. He told me he loved me. I gave him a hug."

Lauren Lumpkin and Emily Davies contributed to this report.