Metro
Local Digest

333 words
26 January 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Carjacking suspects captured in a freezer

Many restaurants can be found near the U.S. Capitol, and at least one apparently has an outdoor freezer. On Tuesday, according to U.S. Capitol Police, officers found two suspects inside just such a piece of equipment.

About 11:45 a.m., the Capitol Police said, an officer near the 100 block of E Street NW spotted a sedan that was thought to be connected to carjackings outside the District.

Officers tried to stop the car, but it sped off, police said. It struck a Capitol Police van and then crashed into a police SUV in the 300 block of Third Street SE, police said.

Two people ran, police said, and tried to hide in an outdoor freezer behind a restaurant on Pennsylvania Avenue SE.

Police said they arrested two 18-year-olds, Cedae Hardy and Landrell Jordan. A gun was found, police said.

In a statement, police said the two faced charges that included unauthorized use of an auto, reckless driving, fleeing and destruction of property in addition to carrying a pistol without a license.

- Martin Weil

VIRGINIA

Ex-head of teachers union faces charges

The former president of the Arlington Education Association (AEA) has been arrested and charged with embezzlement in connection with a possible theft of funds from the organization, Fairfax County police said.

Ingrid Gant, 54, of Woodbridge was the president of the AEA for six years before being terminated March 30, police said.

Detectives were notified of the potential theft Sept. 23 after an internal audit was conducted.

An outside audit helped to show that $410,782.10 was embezzled during Gant's tenure, police said. Detectives began investigating, and Gant was arrested on four counts of embezzlement.

After being taken to the Prince William County jail, Gant was released on an unsecured bond.

The case was handled by Fairfax police because the Arlington Education Association is headquartered in Fairfax County, authorities said.

- Martin Weil