Metro
Local Digest

472 words
26 September 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Molotov cocktail attack at Cuban Embassy

The U.S. Secret Service is investigating after someone apparently threw at least one molotov cocktail at the Cuban Embassy in Northwest Washington on Sunday night, according to law enforcement authorities and the embassy.

In a statement, the Secret Service, which investigates crimes at foreign missions, said there was no fire and no "significant damage to the building." The D.C. fire department was not called to the scene, a spokesman said.

Molotov cocktails are improvised incendiary devices, typically a container filled with flammable liquid ignited with a burning fuse.

A Secret Service spokesman said no arrest has been made and a motive has not been determined. The incident occurred about 8 p.m. at the embassy in the 2600 block of 16th Street NW, near Meridian Hill Park.

Bruno Eduardo Rodríguez Parrilla, Cuba's minister of foreign affairs, posted on X that two molotov cocktails were thrown at the building. He said no staff members were hurt.

- Peter Hermann

MARYLAND

Arrest in fatal shooting in Prince George's

A 34-year-old man has been arrested and charged with murder in a fatal shooting in the Forestville area in August, Prince George's County police said.

Devonte Taylor of District Heights is charged with first- and second-degree murder and related counts in the killing of Tyrone Thomas, 37, also of District Heights. Taylor is in the custody of the county corrections department, police said.

Officers responded to a reported shooting at 1:35 a.m. on Aug. 13 and found Thomas with gunshot wounds in the 3700 block of Donnell Drive. He was taken to a hospital, where he was pronounced dead, police said. Two other men were shot, and their injuries were not life-threatening, according to police.

Police said that a motive is under investigation and that Taylor knew the victims.

It was not immediately clear whether Taylor has an attorney.

- Jasmine Hilton

Woman, 30, charged in deadly robbery

A 30-year-old woman has been charged with murder in an April shooting that occurred during a robbery in the unincorporated section of Hyattsville, Prince George's County police said.

Karen Andrade of Silver Spring was arrested Tuesday and faces charges of first- and second-degree murder and related counts in the killing of Rudy Perez Gutierrez, 24, of Hyattsville.

Her boyfriend, Alex Quinteros, 29, of Takoma Park, was previously arrested and charged with murder in Gutierrez's killing, authorities said.

Officers responded on the evening of April 14 to a reported shooting in the 2100 block of Guilford Road, police said. They found Perez Gutierrez and another victim with gunshot wounds, according to charging documents. Perez Gutierrez was pronounced dead at the scene. The other victim suffered non-life-threatening injuries, police said.

- Jasmine Hilton