Metro station, and no longer waits for the bus at the stop on her corner, outside a 7-Eleven where she says she has observed regular daytime drug transactions.

MacDonald is a retired sales director who has lived in Mount Pleasant for 30 years and is well-versed in the dangers of urban life. In the early 2000s, she said, a mugger threw her down and stole her purse and a diamond necklace.

She said she feels less safe today. Her reasons include the blood-soaked T-shirt she found one recent morning less than a block from her house - a vestige, she later learned, of a stabbing. On another morning, she saw a man violently plunging a knife into a tree and threatening people assembled on the sidewalk playing cards and dominoes.

"If this is what's happening in my little neighborhood, and it's palpable, what's happening in the rest of the city?" MacDonald asked. "There seems to be no consequences."

At an August community meeting, dozens of Chinatown residents complained to police about a pervasive sense of disorder at Seventh and H streets NW, site of the neighborhood's landmark arch. Day and night, clusters of people linger outside a Metro station entrance, including panhandlers, pot smokers and some who appear emotionally disturbed.

Nora Fanfalone, 28, a management consultant who attended the meeting, moved to an apartment overlooking Seventh and H in 2021 because she wanted to be downtown, close to her work and friends. What she did not want, she said, is the constant feeling that her "safety and life, potentially, are threatened."

On many days, she said, she has been verbally harassed as she walked through the intersection, including once at 8 a.m. when a man said, "Good morning," and shoved her when she didn't respond. After arriving home from work on another day, she said, she heard gunshots and saw from her window a body crumpled on the sidewalk.

"I'm like, 'How did I get this wrong? I live across from the Smithsonian and there's an Hermès store two blocks away,'" she said. "It's very surprising that public safety is an issue in a neighborhood with such high traffic and major attractions."

Despite her complaints, she recently renewed her lease, and she described her location as convenient and rent as ideal. She also has found ways to avoid her corner. Instead of using her building's entrance, she comes and goes through an unmarked rear door.

For some, though, finding ways to adapt is not enough.

James, 58, a technology lobbyist, stopped walking many places after he, his husband and another couple were beaten by a group of youngsters on scooters as they walked to Dupont Circle in 2019 (James spoke on the condition that his full name not be used to protect his privacy as a crime victim). After the attack, and as the pandemic unfolded, he noticed that the volume of text alerts he received about crime seemed to increase, arriving not only at night but also during the day. He began feeling increasingly unsafe, not even walking in the afternoon anymore after someone - a student, he assumed - threw a bottle at him as he walked to a Whole Foods when school let out.

By then, James said, he and his husband, residents of the city for nearly 30 years, had decided to leave D.C. They relocated last month to a condo in Maryland. His decision to move, he said, crystallized as he anticipated retirement. "I've always thought I could outrun any criminal in the past," he said. "I can't anymore. I'm a sitting duck."

'I'm so used to this'

Absalom Jordan was about to go to sleep in his Southeast apartment the other night when he heard gunshots. The sound is familiar enough to him that he did not feel compelled to even look out his window. He got into bed and figured he'd find out what happened the next day.

Jordan, 82, has lived for nearly 30 years in Washington Highlands, a Ward 8 neighborhood that is among the city's most violent. On Aug. 24, a noontime meeting he helped organize about security at his building was interrupted when several participants - a police officer and two guards - had to respond to reports of nearby gunfire.

"I'm so used to this," said Jordan, who lived in Southeast during the city's drug wars. The mayhem of those years - rooted in turf battles between drug gangs - made more sense to him than the crime that involves youngsters now.

He worries that city officials are focused more on easy answers - requesting the National Guard, for example - than identifying root causes of violence. "There's no rhyme or reason to it; there's no rationale," he said. "These young people don't have any limits to what they'll do because they don't value life."

Floyd, who coaches kids in Ward 8, said he finds it difficult to connect with teenagers focused on building their Instagram personas, posting images of themselves "smoking weed and having the big gun on their hip. Their clout is the 'likes,' the followers, the engagement. We're living in a world we've never seen before."

In recent weeks, Floyd said he has gone to court to appeal for probationary sentences for three teenagers, including a 14-year-old who brought a gun to school and a 16-year-old involved in a series of armed robberies. While committed to being a mentor, Floyd said he worries that he's helping to enable criminal behavior.

"I want to do whatever I can to give them the best chance," he said. "The flip side is, with me doing that, they never learn their lesson, so we're here next month."

During the crack epidemic, the city's population declined and its finances tanked. In 1993, the violence was alarming enough that then-Mayor Sharon Pratt Kelly (D) asked President Bill Clinton to send in the National Guard, a request he denied. The solutions - aggressive law enforcement - seemed more obvious than now, with downtown's future uncertain and police staffing at a historic low.

Sabel Harris, an advisory neighborhood commissioner, lives near the corner of 14th and U streets NW and is struggling to find a path. She prefers non-punitive approaches to curbing violence and questions whether adding police will "mean you have more incompetency."

Yet as she walked her dog one afternoon in her neighborhood, on streets littered with shattered glass from car break-ins, Harris said she understands why people clamor for more police officers. The area she represents, she said, has been the site of at least 10 shootings since her 2021 ANC election. Bullets have pierced her building, including a neighbor's window. A man whom she befriended, Marvin Johnson Jr., was shot and killed earlier this year near her corner.

"When it's someone you know, it's really hard to wrap your head around," Harris, 33, said as she began to cry. "I'm sad and frustrated and I'm at a loss about what we can do. It feels like a lot of words and talk."

Three miles east, Brian Beaty, 33, a business consultant, finds himself questioning whether Capitol Hill, where he and his wife moved in 2021, is safe enough to raise their 1-year-old daughter.

His concerns began taking shape soon after they moved in, when their neighbor's house was burglarized. There was also a late-night shooting around the corner. Beaty takes precautions - staying home at night, reminding himself to lock his car and activate the house alarm - even as the requirement for such vigilance "feels wrong."

"I don't want to live my life in panic and worry," he said.

The other day, as he walked his dog, Beaty saw a man trying to pull a driver out of a Toyota and realized he was witnessing a carjacking. A passerby jumped in to defend the driver. A second carjacker grabbed a golf club and walked toward the passerby.

It was 4:40 p.m.

Beaty, still holding his dog on a leash, used his phone to record the melee, including the carjackers retreating and fleeing in their car - footage he shared with police and news stations.

He said he felt a sense of satisfaction that he had documented the incident and ensured that people know that "this can happen anywhere." He and his wife, he said, remain committed to raising their daughter on Capitol Hill, at least for now.