Metro
One charged in gunfight outside SW restaurant

Peter Hermann 
553 words
6 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A shooting that injured three people Monday night outside a seafood restaurant along the waterfront in Southwest Washington was described by police as a gun battle between a group that had just finished eating and others waiting in a parking lot.

One member of the group that had just exited the Point D.C. restaurant told police they had been victims of an attempted robbery for jewelry. But a co-owner of the restaurant, Greg Casten, said that based on surveillance video, the attack appeared to be "targeted toward an individual and not a random robbery."

Authorities said the injuries were not serious. Casten said gunfire struck five glass windows at the restaurant in Buzzard Point, disrupted dinner service for 20 guests and prompted a bartender to put active-shooter training into action and force a colleague to the floor for safety. He said no one inside the restaurant was hurt.

The 8:30 p.m. shooting, south of Nationals Park in an area rapidly transforming into a redeveloped residential and nightlife district, raised more concerns about rising crime in the District. An hour later, a congressman from Texas was carjacked at gunpoint in the nearby Navy Yard area.

"Living in the city," Casten said of the recent violence, as if it were a given. He and his family own several restaurants in D.C., including in Georgetown and Ivy City. The Point D.C. is in the 2100 block of Second Street SW.

D.C. police said in an arrest affidavit that three men had walked out of the restaurant and were headed for a parking lot across the street. One of the restaurant patrons told police that a gunman tried to steal a necklace from one his friends. But the police narrative does not describe a robbery attempt. Police said video shows four men get out of a black BMW "with weapons drawn" and aim at the three men who had just emerged from the restaurant.

"A volley of gunfire" between one of the restaurant patrons and the four assailants ensued, the affidavit says. Police said the armed patron began "firing repeatedly from the doorway of the Point."

Police said three people, including a teenage juvenile, were wounded. Police did not identify the group to which the people struck by bullets belonged. Authorities said that they recovered two firearms and that several people involved escaped on foot and in the BMW.

Police said the patron who fired a gun, Amori Davis, 27, was arrested and charged with possessing an unlicensed firearm. He was ordered detained pending a court hearing scheduled for Friday. His attorney did not respond to an interview request.

Violent crime in D.C., driven by spikes in homicides and robberies, is up nearly 40 percent this year compared with the same period in 2022. Residents have raised concerns, while Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) has pushed for tougher laws and sentences and to make it easier for judges to detain certain criminal defendants before their trials.

Casten said when the gunfire started outside the restaurant, staffers and patrons appeared calm and acted quickly to find cover. "It's almost like people understand and know that when there's gunfire," he said, "get down and get safe."