Metro
Local Digest

353 words
14 November 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Man is fatally shot in Southeast, police say

A 38-year-old man was fatally shot Saturday morning in Southeast Washington, D.C. police said.

James Deale, of Northeast Washington, died at the scene, police said.

The shooting occurred about 3 a.m. Saturday in the 3500 block of Stanton Road, near the District's border with Prince George's County, D.C. police said. Officers found Deale with several gunshot injuries.

No further information was immediately available. Efforts to reach Deale's family were unsuccessful.

- Ellie Silverman

Suspect arrested in fatal shooting of man

Detectives have arrested a suspect in the fatal shooting of a man found inside a vehicle early Sunday in Northeast Washington, police said.

Police said John Dickens II, 46, faces the charge of second-degree murder while armed in the shooting of Kelvin Hamlett, 41, of Southwest Washington.

While investigating reports of gunshots at 2:42 a.m. Sunday, police said officers were flagged down and directed to the rear of the 700 block of 16th Street NE, where they found Hamlett shot inside a vehicle. He died at the scene.

Detectives zeroed in on a suspect during the investigation, and the Fifth District Crime Suppression Team found Dickens, who police said was in possession of a handgun. Dickens has no fixed address.

It was not known whether Dickens had obtained a lawyer. Relatives could not immediately be found.

- Justin George

VIRGINIA

Suspect arrested in Alexandria stabbing

Police are investigating a homicide and have arrested a suspect in the fatal stabbing of a 38-year-old man Sunday in Alexandria.

Police said in a news release Monday that about 4:27 p.m. Sunday, officers responded to the call regarding a possible stabbing in the 2700 block of Dewitt Avenue, where they found the victim, who died at the scene. The office of the chief medical examiner will conduct an autopsy to determine the cause and manner of death.

Police said they have a suspect in custody but did not release any additional information about the suspect or the victim.

- Omari Daniels