Metro
Local Digest

374 words
19 June 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Shootings in SE leave

teen slain, child hurt

A teenager was killed and a child was seriously wounded in separate shootings in Southeast Washington on Sunday night, police said.

The teenager died at a hospital after gunfire that was reported about 8:45 p.m. in the 2700 block of Langston Place SE, D.C. police spokesman Paris Lewbel said.

He appeared to be in his mid- to late teens, Lewbel said.

In the other incident, a "young juvenile" was critically wounded, but conscious and breathing after a shooting that was reported just before 10 p.m. near 22nd Street and Minnesota Avenue SE, Lewbel said.

In the Langston Place incident, a second teenager was also shot. He was conscious at the hospital, Lewbel said.

In the Minnesota Avenue shooting, and adult also was wounded, Lewbel said.

No motive could be learned in either of the two shootings. No suspects were identified, and the victims were not named.

Langston Place is a largely residential street in the Garfield Heights area, north of Suitland Parkway.

The killing on Langston was the weekend's second with a teenage victim.

- Martin Weil

and Peter Hermann

4 teens face charges in

carjackings, robberies

Police have arrested four teenagers in separate robberies and carjacking incidents in the District. The names of the suspects were not released.

In a statement Saturday, D.C. police said a 16-year-old male and two 15-year-old males, all from Southeast Washington, were arrested and charged with armed carjacking and other offenses after robberies that occurred early Friday.

Police said the juveniles were charged in carjackings in the 3400 block of B Street SE; at East Capitol and 17th streets NE; at Montana Avenue and Bladensburg Road NE; at C and 19th streets NE; and at Fourth and Morse streets NE.

They also were charged with armed robbery in an incident in the 1700 block of New Jersey Avenue NW and two in the 3900 block of Minnesota Avenue NE, according to police. They also face charges in an attempted carjacking in the 1300 block of Okie Street NE and an attempted robbery while armed in the 1900 block of Fenwick Street NE.

- Justin Wm. Moyer