Metro
Local Digest

353 words
1 April 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Southeast man killed

in double shooting

A man was killed in a shooting that occurred midday Wednesday in Southeast Washington, police said. A second man wounded in the shooting was conscious and breathing, according to D.C. police.

Police responded to the shooting about 11:45 a.m. in the 3000 block of 30th Street SE.

Police on Thursday identified the slain man as Antonio Burnette, 34, of Southeast.

Burnette's family could not be reached.

- Emily Davies

MARYLAND

Man dead, nephew charged in shooting

A man was fatally shot Thursday afternoon in Prince George's County, police said.

Officers responded about 1:50 p.m. to the 8500 block of Greenbelt Road for a reported shooting, police said. They found a man, later identified as Steven Mouring, 44, of Suitland, with gunshot wounds. He was pronounced dead at the scene, police said.

Mouring's nephew, Daquan White, 26, of Greenbelt, was charged with first- and second-degree murder in the shooting, which police say stemmed from an argument.

- Jasmine Hilton

Teen found slain in Cheverly, police say

A 16-year-old boy was fatally shot in Cheverly on Thursday evening, Prince George's County police said.

Cheverly and Prince George's County police officers responded about 6:25 p.m. to a reported shooting in the 6400 block of Landover Road, police said.

They found Eduardo Saucedo Olmos of Lanham with a gunshot wound inside a vehicle. He died at the scene, police said.

- Jasmine Hilton

VIRGINIA

Man found dead in Arlington apartment

Authorities are investigating the death of a man found in an Arlington apartment this week as a homicide.

Arlington County police said they responded Tuesday to the 100 block of North Thomas Street in the Buckingham neighborhood, where a maintenance worker had entered an apartment and found Sean Bowman, 28, unresponsive.

Medics pronounced Bowman, who had no fixed address, dead at the scene, according to police.

A police spokeswoman said "the preliminary investigation indicates the victim suffered upper-body trauma," adding that the medical examiner would determine the cause of death.

- Salvador Rizzo