Metro
D.C. SNAP recipients could get boosted aid

Meagan Flynn 
989 words
5 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Low-income families who rely on food assistance and workers who were excluded from pandemic aid, such as undocumented immigrants, are expected to receive millions in boosted benefits and cash, respectively, after the District ended up in better financial shape than expected this fall.

Not everyone thought it would actually happen. It was a contingency plan situation, where D.C. could only fund the programs if there was money to spare at the end of the fiscal year. And it seemed like a big if. The city had trudged through a tough budget year, pleaded with federal workers to come back to its empty office buildings, and grasped for new ways to revitalize downtown as the commercial real estate market struggled.

Yet after all that, the District's chief financial officer delivered some good news as the fiscal year came to a close Sept. 30: Although some long-term risks remain worrisome - such as a projection that 25 percent of D.C.'s office and commercial building space will be vacant by 2026 - for now, the office revised the city's 2023 revenue estimates upward by $178.8 million. That was largely thanks to higher-than-expected sales tax and corporate income tax revenue.

Now, that increase will allow D.C. to temporarily boost food assistance benefits by nearly $40 million, and give $20 million in direct cash assistance to certain workers who were locked out of federal pandemic aid, such as undocumented immigrants.

"It actually shows the strength of the District economy at the moment," said D.C. Council member Christina Henderson (I-At Large), who led the legislation to boost Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) benefits. "Admittedly, I didn't actually think that the $40 million in excess revenue would come to fruition given everything going on."

Council member Brianne K. Nadeau (D-Ward 1) said she didn't, either. She said the workers she has heard from, who could receive hundreds of dollars in direct payments, are ecstatic that the checks could finally be coming after years of advocacy. Along with undocumented immigrants, others excluded from unemployment assistance or other pandemic aid included certain domestic workers or "cash economy" workers.

"This is going to be really good for all of our communities. Folks are going to be able to use that to pay off debt, to make purchases they've been delaying - it's going to be a critical lifeline," Nadeau said.

Both programs were intended to address the dual impacts of the pandemic and a strained economy that caused high inflation and may have made it harder for low-income families to bounce back.

Henderson said she began discussions during the pandemic with D.C. Hunger Solutions, which advocates to increase food access. In 2019, about 94,000 District residents relied on SNAP, according to the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. By 2020, that number spiked to roughly 135,000 residents.

LaMonika Jones, executive director of D.C. Hunger Solutions, said residents on SNAP - overwhelmingly east of the river in Wards 7 and 8, she said - were still struggling to afford groceries even with a federal emergency allotment that increased their benefits during the pandemic.

That enhanced federal aid expired in March - leaving tens of thousands of D.C. residents suddenly with less money to spend on groceries each month, in some cases significantly less.

Henderson's bill, Give SNAP a Raise, passed in December, creating a local SNAP supplement to enhance families' food-assistance benefit by 10 percent - an amount Henderson acknowledged was modest but could still help families, especially after the expiration of the emergency benefits. Still, Henderson said that in a tough budget year, she anticipated difficulty funding the legislation, at least permanently - and cash assistance for excluded workers faced a similar challenge.

As a solution, council member Janeese Lewis George (D-Ward 4) led an amendment in the budget that would trigger funding for both programs as long as the future revenue was available. Lewis George said the economic forecast never worried her as she pushed for the contingency plan. "Every year they say we're not going to have enough - and then every year, it's there," Lewis George said.

Nadeau said Tuesday that the excluded workers had reason to worry - she was wary of giving them "false hope," she said, because they had been burned by the city before. The council had previously budgeted $20 million for the workers in 2022, requiring EventsDC - a quasi-governmental agency with connections to the hospitality industry - to administer the money with the help of nonprofits. But just as they were ramping up to distribute the money this spring, Council Chairman Phil Mendelson (D) said that the mayor had repurposed the funds since they were unspent.

The executive's Office of Budget and Performance Management had previously been critical of the council's pursuit of cash assistance as D.C. was trying to open up after the pandemic-era shutdowns, noting the economy was in a different place. "Now, DC is open and job opportunities abound; however, the Council will still take a vote on using $20 million of future revenue to fund a program intended to support workers when there were no opportunities," Jenny Reed, director of the office, said in a statement in 2022.

Now even further removed from that 2022 vote, Nadeau said she disagreed with any suggestion that the help is no longer needed. "One of the arguments at the time was people are going back to work - they don't really need it anymore. What that didn't take into account was that people had cashed out their savings. They had taken extreme measures like not paying rent just to make ends meet," Nadeau said. "Even this money is coming late."

The 10 percent enhancement in SNAP benefits would run from January through September 2024.