Metro
Understanding the District's rising homicide count

Emily Davies 
535 words
1 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C04
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

The District is on track to end this year with the worst homicide count since the late 1990s. More than 210 people have been slain as of the end of Sept. 28. Nineteen of them were children or teenagers, which is more than the number of youths killed all of last year. The lethal violence in Washington has disproportionate impacts on certain people: those who live in historically impoverished neighborhoods, people in their late 20s and early 30s, and Black men. Here are answers to questions you may have.

Where in D.C. have people been killed?

The city's most impoverished neighborhoods have seen the most bloodshed so far this year. Killings were especially prevalent in Bellevue, a Southeast neighborhood that borders Prince George's County, and other communities east of the Anacostia River.

Some affluent neighborhoods, mainly west of Rock Creek Park, have been spared from killings. But other areas nearby have seen increases in homicides in the first nine months of this year. At least nine people have been slain in the U Street area and at least eight have been killed in Brentwood.

How old are the victims?

The youngest person slain so far in 2023 was 5-month-old Kenneth Geo Walton, who died of what police described as injuries "consistent with potential physical abuse." The oldest was 88-year-old Gordon Wilson, killed in an assault inside a home in Northwest.

The majority of victims, however, were between 18 and 42 years old. More than 50 of them were between 26 and 32 years of age. The vast majority were male, and according to police data, at least 85 percent of the deaths involved firearms.

When did the homicides occur?

July and August were particularly dangerous months for Washingtonians, continuing a long-standing trend of violence worsening over the summer. Ten people were killed in the first five days of July; in the first six days of August, two triple homicides and a spate of other shootings claimed 16 lives.

April has been the safest month this year, with 15 people slain.

Which neighborhoods have seen the biggest increases in deadly violence?

Ward 1, which includes Columbia Heights, Mount Pleasant and Adams Morgan, has seen roughly twice as many homicides compared with the same time in 2022, according to police data. In July, a man was killed while watching a soccer game in Adams Morgan in what police have said was a dispute involving people who knew each other. Less than half a mile north, three men were shot to death around 1 a.m. a few weeks later.

Ward 8, an area crushed by decades of intractable poverty and underinvestment, has also seen surges in lethal violence. The precinct recorded more than 80 homicides by Sept. 28, according to D.C. police data. At this same point last year, fewer than 60 people had been slain in the ward.

Ward 4, which includes Brightwood, Petworth and Fort Totten, also has seen a significant increase in homicides - up roughly 57 percent compared with the same time last year.

John D. Harden and Peter Hermann contributed to this report.