Metro
Local Digest

480 words
7 May 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Biden to give keynote speech at Howard

President Biden will deliver the commencement address for the Class of 2023 at Howard University and the Air Force Academy, the White House announced Saturday.

Biden will give the keynote address at Howard, the historically Black university in the District that is Vice President Harris's alma mater, on May 13.

- Danielle Douglas-Gabriel

MARYLAND

Trooper charged with assault, sex offense

A Maryland state police trooper was arrested and charged with assault and a sex offense, authorities said Saturday.

At around 4 a.m., Trooper First Class Ryan Bandy, a member of the Maryland State Police for nearly 10 years, was arrested, Anne Arundel County police said in a statement. Bandy was most recently assigned to the Westminster Barrack.

Bandy was charged with false imprisonment, second-degree assault and a fourth-degree sex offense, the statement said. He was suspended with pay and released on his own recognizance, according to the statement. Efforts to reach Bandy were unsuccessful.

Maryland State Police internal affairs is handling the investigation, county police said.

- Justin Wm. Moyer

Man charged with murder, arson

A 40-year-old Maryland man was charged with first-degree murder after the fatal shooting of another man on Wednesday, police said Friday. At around 2:05 p.m. on Wednesday, officers responded to the 6100 block of 42nd Avenue in Hyattsville to assist Prince George's County firefighters who were on scene of an apartment fire, Prince George's County police said in a statement. They found 56-year-old Roger Neal dead in an apartment. It was later determined that he died of a gunshot wound, the statement said.

On Friday, police said Marcell Billups of Lanham was charged with first- and second-degree murder, arson and related charges after he shot Neal during an argument before setting fire to the residence. The two men knew each other, according to police.

Billups is in custody in D.C. awaiting extradition to Maryland, police said. An attorney for Billups could not be determined.

- Justin Wm. Moyer

Police charge man in Silver Spring killing

A Maryland man was charged with first-degree murder and home invasion after the killing of another man last month, police said Friday. Around 3:20 a.m. on April 9, police went to the 11800 block of Old Columbia Pike in Silver Spring and found 20-year-old Carlos Rashard Carter with trauma to the body, Montgomery County police said in a news release at the time. Carter was taken to a hospital, where he was pronounced dead.

On Thursday, 20-year-old Kaleab Abebe Berhanu of Baltimore was arrested and charged with first-degree murder, home invasion and firearm violations in Carter's killing, police said Friday. Court records did not list the name of a lawyer representing Berhanu.

- Justin Wm. Moyer