Metro
Girl's death allegedly linked to gangs' feud

Keith L. Alexander 
375 words
17 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

The 10-year-old girl who was fatally struck by a bullet on Mother's Day as she rode in the back seat of a car with her family got caught in a drive-by shooting between two feuding gangs, according to court testimony Monday.

At a hearing in D.C. Superior Court, Judge Anthony Epstein ordered 19-year-old Karon Gregory to remain in jail on charges of first-degree murder while armed in connection with the fatal shooting of Arianna Davis following the testimony of a D.C. homicide detective who detailed new allegations in the case.

Lead detective Gabriel Truby testified that Gregory was a member of a street gang from the Congress Heights neighborhood in Southeast Washington that had an ongoing feud with a crew near the Mayfair neighborhood of Northeast Washington.

Truby testified that video obtained by the officers showed Gregory getting into a stolen Audi with three other individuals before the shooting. The Audi was then used in the deadly shooting and more than 60 casings from various weapons were later found in the area, Truby said.

Arianna's family was driving home from a Mother's Day event after 9 p.m. in the 3700 block of Hayes Street NE when she was hit in the hail of gunfire. She died at a hospital three days later.

Truby also testified that multiple guns were later found in Gregory's bedroom in his home, including two assault rifles underneath his bed and two handguns found under his pillow on his bed.

Truby testified that the shooters wore masks. Under cross-examination by Gregory's public defender, Anthony Matthews, Truby said no one identified Gregory as a shooter. But the detective said a witness and security video identified Gregory as getting into the stolen car minutes before the shooting.

The judge found that the combination of the weapons in Gregory's bedroom and the video identification minutes before the shooting was enough evidence to link Gregory to the shooting.

"If there is probable cause to believe he was inside the car, there is probable cause to believe he was involved in the drive-by shooting," Epstein said.