Metro
Local Digest

479 words
21 November 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Man fatally shot outside school in SE

A man was fatally shot Monday afternoon outside an elementary school in Southeast Washington, according to D.C. police.

The shooting occurred about 3:30 p.m. at Fourth and Chesapeake streets SE, near Hendley Elementary School.

A school system spokesperson said that dismissal had started when the shooting occurred and that students were brought back into the building. It was unclear whether any students saw anything related to the killing. They were put on lockdown until about 4:10 p.m.

Police had few details of the shooting. A spokesman for the department said the man was pronounced dead at the scene and police were looking for a dark-colored SUV.

Before the shooting, police had recorded 247 homicides in the city this year, a 34 percent increase over this period in 2022. The city hasn't seen this many killings since 2003, when 248 homicides were recorded.

Police on Monday also said an 18-year-old man shot in an apartment building in Southeast Washington on Sunday had died at the scene.

That shooting occurred about 8:20 p.m. in the 2300 block of Good Hope Court SE in Skyland. A police report lists the location as a parking garage.

Police identified the victim as Treyvon Wilson of Northwest. No arrest has been made.

On Sunday, police said a Maryland man, 24-year-old Anwar Wingate, was found fatally shot in a parking garage in Northwest Washington's Shaw neighborhood. On Friday night, Shane Williams, 18, was fatally shot on Wahler Court in Southeast, police said.

- Peter Hermann

and Lauren Lumpkin

MARYLAND

Fire destroys church roof in Montgomery

A fire Monday afternoon destroyed the roof of a Mormon church on Western Avenue, causing more than $5 million in damage, according to Montgomery County Fire Department spokesperson Pete Piringer.

The fire appeared to start in the attic area of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which is in Chevy Chase, on the Maryland side of the state's border with D.C. Piringer said he arrived soon after the initial 12:25 p.m. call to find smoke billowing from one of the steeples.

It took more than 100 firefighters until 2:30 p.m. to control the blaze, Piringer said. By that time, about 90 percent of the roof had burned off.

Piringer said that dozens of firefighters were inside the brick church when part of the roof collapsed but that no one was seriously injured. He said there were no other injuries reported from the blaze.

Piringer said officials were still investigating the fire but "it appears accidental."

Firefighters with the D.C. Fire and EMS Department assisted with the response.

As of 4:15 p.m. Monday, Western Avenue was closed between Wisconsin and Connecticut avenues.

- Emily Davies