Metro
4 men killed in 24 hours as homicides continue to climb

Peter Hermann 
440 words
18 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B04
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Three men were fatally shot and another man was found bludgeoned to death in an alley during a violent 24-hour stretch in the District that began Monday afternoon, according to D.C. police.

The four killings appeared unrelated, police said, and occurred in three of the city's four quadrants - from the Benning neighborhood in Southeast Washington to the edge of Capitol Hill in Northeast up to Brightwood in Northwest.

As of Tuesday afternoon, police said they had not made arrests in any of the killings. Authorities released few details and did not comment on possible motives.

There have now been more than 222 criminal homicides in the District this year, a 35 percent increase over this time in 2022, according to police statistics. D.C. surpassed 200 killings on Aug. 12, the earliest point since 1997.

The latest incident occurred a few minutes before noon Tuesday, when police found a man shot inside a vehicle in the 4100 block of East Capitol Street SE in the Benning neighborhood.

A police spokesman said the man died at the scene. His name was not immediately released.

Hours earlier on Tuesday, police said, officers found a body of a man in an alley in the 900 block of Sheridan Street NW in the Brightwood neighborhood, two blocks east of Georgia Avenue. Police said the man had suffered blunt-force trauma to his body.

Police said the body was found about 12:50 a.m. His name has not yet been made public.

On Monday night, police said, they responded to reports of gunshots in the 300 block of Tennessee Avenue NE, near C Street, and found two men inside a vehicle. Police said both had been shot, and one of them died. The other man's wounds were not considered life-threatening, police said.

The shooting occurred about 10:20 p.m. on the edge of Capitol Hill, a few blocks northeast of Lincoln Park. The name of the man who died had not been made public as of Tuesday afternoon.

Earlier Monday afternoon, police said, a 28-year-old man was fatally shot in the parking lot of a shopping complex in Northeast Washington. Police identified the victim as Davon Fuller of Northwest Washington.

The shooting occurred about 1:40 p.m. in the 1500 block of Maryland Avenue NE, near Starburst Plaza, named for a confluence of major streets that meet at that location, including H Street, Benning Road and Maryland and Florida avenues.

Efforts to reach Fuller's relatives were not successful.