Metro
Guard shoots, injures teen at Metro station

Peter Hermann 
539 words
22 July 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A guard providing extra security to help abate crime in the region's transit system shot and critically wounded a teenager who had himself shot a man, then exchanged gunfire with the guard Thursday night at the Fort Totten Metro station in Northeast Washington, according to a spokeswoman for the agency.

Authorities said the guard, called a special police officer, confronted a group of people fighting on a train platform shortly before 11 p.m.

Metro spokeswoman Sherri Ly said that one person pulled out a gun during the fracas and that two people in the group struggled for control of the firearm, which fell to the ground. She said the teenager picked up the gun and shot a man.

Ly said the security guard confronted the armed teenager and "they exchanged shots." Ly said the wounded teenager ran out of the station and was caught by the guard, who was not injured in the shootout. She said a firearm was found near a set of the Metro station's fare gates.

Police said the teen and the man who was shot were taken to a hospital with critical injuries, but Ly said they were expected to survive.

Metro said the teenager was charged with assault with intent to kill and carrying a pistol without a license. No age was given. The Metro Transit Police agency is investing the shooting that occurred during the fight; D.C. police are investigating the shooting of the teen by the security guard. Special police officers are licensed by the District.

Ly said police do not know why the group was fighting. An initial account provided by Metro Transit Police on Twitter said the guard fired a gun but omitted that a round had struck someone. The station on Galloway Street NE, near the Michigan Park neighborhood, serves the Red and Green lines. It was closed until about 7 a.m. Friday.

Violence at Metro stations and aboard trains has been an increasing concern for months, and several people have been killed in the Metro system this year.

In May, 17-year-old Brendan Ofori was killed by a man trying to rob him aboard a train as it pulled into the Waterfront station, police said. That same month, 18-year-old Tenneson Vaughn Leslie Jr. was fatally shot in the head as he ran from two assailants on a Metro platform in Wheaton.

In February, a Metro employee was fatally shot after he tried to stop a gunman targeting commuters inside the Potomac Avenue station.

In February, D.C. Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) announced plans to deploy D.C. police to accompany transit officers at Metro stations across the District. Metro has said it also assigned private security guards who have arrest powers to patrol up 20 percent of its 97 stations, including the Fort Totten station.

On Tuesday, Metro General Manager Randy Clarke tweeted that Metro's ambassador program, along with other security initiatives including new mental health crisis-intervention specialists, have corresponded with a 27 percent drop in serious crimes in the Metro system from last quarter, which ended June 30.

Justin George contributed to this report.