Metro
Amid a rise in D.C. crime, 2 girls hit by stray bullets

Peter Hermann                Omari Daniels                Emily Davies                Martin Weil 
1,146 words
16 May 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A 10-year-old girl riding in a vehicle with her parents and siblings was shot and critically wounded Sunday night in a barrage of gunfire in Northeast Washington, and a 12-year-old girl was grazed by a stray bullet as she slept in her bed in Southeast - prompting condemnations from city leaders under pressure to reduce violent crime in the District.

The indiscriminate shots that struck Arianna Davis in Mayfair, near Kenilworth Aquatic Gardens - and then another girl in a separate incident four miles away on Naylor Road in Randle Highlands - served as stark reminders of how gun violence is increasingly injuring young people in the District.

D.C. Police Chief Robert J. Contee III called the shootings "unacceptable" and described the assailants involved in the Mother's Day attack that gravely injured Arianna as "cowards." Police said a least 50 bullets were fired from the street or sidewalk in that shooting, though they said it does not appear at this stage that anyone in the vehicle was targeted.

D.C. police, the FBI and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives are each offering rewards of $10,000 for information that leads to an arrest and conviction in the shooting of Arianna.

Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) said both children "have a right to be safe in their homes." No arrests have been made in either case. The only description police released was for a vehicle seen on Hayes Street in connection with Arianna's shooting - a small black or dark-colored SUV. Efforts to interview Arianna's mother and other relatives, and the family of the girl wounded while sleeping, were not immediately successful.

The violence comes after Bowser convened a public safety summit, where city leaders discussed ways to combat crime, and the mayor announced she would propose legislation to make it easier to detain certain arrestees before trial. On Monday, the mayor offered more details about that proposal, which includes stiffer penalties for illegal gun possession and suggested ways to make it easier for judges to hold defendants before trial if they have previous convictions for violent crimes.

On Tuesday, Bowser, Contee and other leaders are expected to testify at a congressional hearing focusing on violent crime in the District and city management.

Homicides in the District are up 7 percent over last year; on Monday afternoon, a man was shot and killed in on Martin Luther King Jr. Avenue in Southwest. Carjackings and armed robberies remain a concern. As of May 11, D.C. police said that 43 juveniles had been shot, double the same time last year. Five of them have died. Statistics show that 105 juveniles were shot in all of 2022, 16 of them fatally, nearly double the number from the previous year. Violent crime is up 13 percent this year.

Last year, Bowser declared youth violence an emergency.

Contee, who has announced his plans to retire by early June, said on Monday the mayor's proposals will help hold offenders accountable.

"It is unacceptable to me that a 10-year-old little girl is riding with her mom, dad and two siblings last night got caught in a middle of a barrage of gunfire, on Mother's Day, and is now in the hospital fighting for her life," the chief said. He noted it is equally "unacceptable that a bullet from someone firing shots outside goes through a window at 4 o'clock in the morning of a 12-year-old sleeping in her bed and strikes her in the leg."

Arianna was shot about 9:15 p.m. in the 3700 block of Hayes Street NE, a road that, together with Jay Street, forms a hook-like loop around the Paradise at Parkside apartments. Police had no description of a possible shooter, and said only they were looking for the black or dark-colored SUV.

After the girl's parents recognized that she had been hit, they drove her to a firehouse at the edge of Capitol Hill in the 1500 block of C Street SE, police said. The distance is about three miles. From the firehouse, where she arrived about 9:20 p.m., she was taken to a hospital for treatment, authorities said. Police said she had been struck in the upper body.

Contee said the motive for the shooting remains unknown. Court records in a separate, recent case describe an ongoing feud involving shootings between people in the Mayfair neighborhood and those in the nearby Kenilworth area, but Contee said "we just don't know at this point in the investigation."

Gloria Robinson said she was watching television when she heard several gunshots between 8:30 and 9 p.m., and immediately hit the ground.

"You hear gunshots all the time and you don't know whether anyone got hurt or not," said Robinson, 78, who has lived on Hayes Street for seven years. "This is an everyday thing. It sounded like machine guns."

Robinson, who lives with her three grandchildren, said two of her nephews were killed nine months apart on Quarles Street NE. She said she worries when her 7-year-old grandson wants to ride his bike down the street.

"It's bad when you've got young babies getting caught up in this," Robinson said. "I fear for them. You can't even let your kids ride up and down the street."

Robinson said she does not believe crime is a high priority for Bowser. "She's not doing anything," Robinson said. "I don't know if anyone can do anything about this war over here. She doesn't do anything for people over here. It's just pitiful."

The mayor said she "completely understands" the frustrations of residents who hear gunshots and know children who have been shot. "We are going to do everything within our resources to stop it," Bowser said.

On Monday morning, police were rerouting drivers away from Hayes Street and still had crime-scene tape in place. Broken glass could be seen on the ground, along with a bullet hole in a parked truck. Parents were walking children to school.

Andre Wright, an assistant D.C. police chief, told reporters at the scene Sunday night that investigators from many police units and specialties swarmed into the neighborhood in what he called an "all hands on deck" response.

"We have to get to the bottom of" the shooting, Wright said, asking that the "community keep the family in its prayers." He added, "This is Mother's Day, and they were doing what we all were doing today … we should be talking about Mother's Day, not talking about a tragic event of a 10-year-old being shot."