Metro
Case of missing mother gets trial

Paul Duggan 
1,213 words
12 June 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B04
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

More than a decade after Unique Harris, a 24-year-old mother of two, vanished from her Southeast Washington apartment while her children were asleep, prosecutors in D.C. Superior Court have begun trying to prove that she was murdered, even though her body has not been found.

The man accused of killing her, Isaac Moye, now 46, has been in custody since December 2020, a few months after the 10th anniversary of Harris's disappearance. Clad in a gray suit and flanked by his lawyers, Moye, who was an acquaintance of Harris's, sat in Judge Anthony C. Epstein's courtroom as his trial, expected to last a month, got underway last week.

"He stole her from her family, and he made sure we'd never find her - and we haven't," Assistant U.S. Attorney Vinet Bryant told the jury Tuesday in her opening statement. Gesturing to Moye, Bryant said, "But we found him."

Moye, who was questioned by police repeatedly in the years after Harris's disappearance, has pleaded not guilty to second-degree murder.

One of his attorneys, Candace Mitchell, scoffed at the prosecution's mostly circumstantial case against her client and criticized D.C. police in her opening statement, saying they prematurely eliminated other possible suspects in an "incompetent and irresponsible investigation." Arresting Moye, she said, was "an easy solution to a question that, to this day, they cannot answer: What happened to Unique Harris?"

In October 2010, Moye had just been released from prison after serving five years for assaulting a woman. GPS data from a monitoring device that he was required to wear shows he was in and near Harris's apartment building, in the Garfield Heights neighborhood, from 10:39 p.m. on Oct. 9 until 7:20 a.m. the following day, Bryant said. Later, when Harris's two sons, ages 4 and 5, and a 9-year-old female relative awoke, Harris was gone.

Her eyeglasses, without which she could barely see, were still in the apartment, according to a police affidavit filed in court. Her purse was there, too, with all its usual contents, though her keys and cellphone were missing. And a section of a sofa cushion, as wide as a grapefruit, had been jaggedly cut away, Bryant said. The fabric and the padding that was once beneath it haven't been found.

In the nearly 13 years since then, Bryant said, investigators have not turned up any physical or digital trace of Harris. "Absolutely no footprints in the world," she told the jury, adding, "This is not a missing-person case. This is a homicide."

Prosecutors devoted the first few days of the trial to trying to show that Harris was not the type of person who would disappear on her own - that she must have met with violence.

The 9-year-old girl who stayed in the apartment that night, Talaya Reed, is a daughter of a cousin of Harris's, according to testimony.

She was a few days shy of her 10th birthday and wanted to spend time with Harris's two boys. So Reed's mother, Tiffanee Smith, a close friend of Harris's, left Reed at Harris's apartment for a sleepover.

On the witness stand Thursday, Reed, now 22, said Harris and the children watched a movie before the youngsters went to sleep.

"When Unique Harris put the boys to bed, did she say good night or goodbye?" Assistant U.S. Attorney Erin DeRiso asked Reed.

"Good night," Reed replied in a soft voice.

"Did she do anything that night to lead you to believe she was going to walk away and never come back?"

"Not that I can remember."

Moye, the defendant, met Harris shortly after she moved to D.C. in 2010 and became enamored of her, Bryant said. But Harris had a boyfriend in Richmond.

Referring to Moye, Bryant said: "He was waiting for her to choose him over her boyfriend - and when she didn't, it cost her her life."

On the night of Oct. 9, into Oct. 10, with GPS data showing that Moye was in Harris's apartment, in the 2400 block of Hartford Street SE, Harris had several phone conversations with her boyfriend, Bryant said.

"All the while, the defendant sat there, feeling ignored, feeling jilted," she told the jury. Noting that DNA from Moye's semen was found on parts of the sofa that had not been cut away, she suggested that Moye sexually assaulted Harris, then killed her and spirited away her body.

When the children woke up, the police affidavit says, the apartment was in disarray.

Mitchell, the defense lawyer, derided the prosecution's theory of the case. "You're not going to hear any evidence of a murder," she said in her opening statement.

According to Mitchell and the police affidavit, investigators ruled out several people as suspects, including a maintenance worker with a murder conviction who was fired for improperly entering apartments in Harris's building; an ice cream truck driver with whom Harris had argued; her boyfriend in Richmond; and another man, with whom Harris was involved in a bitter legal dispute.

Police were slow to begin investigating Harris's disappearance and did not give due consideration to the other possible suspects, Mitchell told the jury. "The police did not do any serious work until they were a critical 96 hours behind," she said, and even after that, the detective in charge of the case approached it with indifference.

As for her client's semen on the sofa, she told the jury: "So was the semen of at least two other men. … The couch just shows that Unique Harris had consensual sex." She said: "Isaac Moye is innocent. He doesn't know where Unique Harris went. He doesn't know what happened to her."

The mystery has left Tiffanee Smith, Reed's mother, emotionally devastated. During her half-hour on the witness stand Thursday, she paused for long stretches, crying and dabbing her eyes with a tissue. Later, heaving sobs and nearly collapsing in grief, she needed help keeping her balance as several people escorted her from the courtroom.

"Her loving demeanor, her spirit, everything about her," Smith told the jury, referring to Harris. "I would trust Unique with my whole life."

She recalled dropping off her daughter at Harris's apartment early on the evening of Oct. 9. That was the last time she saw Harris, whom she had known since high school a decade earlier.

"Did she in any way appear depressed to you?" DeRiso asked.

"No," Smith replied.

The next morning, Oct. 10, "my daughter, Talaya, called me and said, 'Mom, Unique is not in the house.' … I said, 'What do you mean?' And she said, 'She's not here.'"

Smith thought Harris might have gone to a store.

But Talaya called her again a while later and said Harris was still not home. So Smith traveled by bus and subway to Harris's apartment, a trip that took nearly two hours.

When she arrived, there was no sign of Harris.

"And that's when worry set in," Smith testified. "That's when panic set it. Where is she?"