Metro
4 charged in killings amid D.C. crime spike

Emily Davies                Peter Hermann 
902 words
6 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

D.C. police have charged a man in a June shooting that killed a woman described as "an innocent bystander," according to an affidavit filed in D.C. Superior Court.

Bobby Lewis Gupton, 25, is charged with first-degree murder while armed in the killing of Tavonayna Povida Glenn, 54.

Gupton is among four people charged with murder in the District in the past five days; in that same period, three people were fatally shot in the city.

The arrests and the killings come as the District continues to battle a spike in violent crime that has shaken many residents, splintered local officials and drawn congressional scrutiny of the city's ability to handle public safety. This year, 253 people have been slain in the District, a 32 percent increase compared with the same period in 2022.

There have been more killings in a calendar year than the District has recorded since 2002.

Glenn was killed June 28 in a barrage of at least 44 shots in the Carver-Langston neighborhood of Northeast Washington, police said.

Just after 10 p.m. that day, police said, four people fired shots amid rowhouses in a residential neighborhood, and a fifth person returned fire. Glenn, caught in the crossfire, was hit in the left side of her chest and collapsed on the sidewalk.

Efforts to reach her relatives were unsuccessful.

Many of this year's D.C. killings are unsolved. As of Monday, police said they had closed 45 percent of homicide cases, most of them by arrests. (Some cases are classified as closed without arrests - for example when the prime suspect is imprisoned in another jurisdiction or is dead.) The 45 percent closure rate is the lowest in at least 16 years.

The day after Glenn was killed, Gupton was arrested on a charge of carrying a pistol without a license. During an interview, detectives asked him whether he had heard about the killing. He shook his head no, according to the affidavit.

He pleaded not guilty to the gun charge and was released in July to await a trial. On Dec. 3, police again arrested him, saying he was one of four people responsible for killing Glenn. No one else has been charged, police said.

Greg Lipper, the lawyer representing Gupton in the gun case, declined to comment on the murder charge. Gupton's attorney in the homicide case did not respond to a request for comment.

On Friday, police charged Clarence McKnight, 22, in the killing of Brandon Lewis. Lewis, 32, was killed that evening inside a building in the 900 block of Rhode Island Avenue NE, police said. McKnight is charged with second-degree murder while armed.

In an affidavit filed in Superior Court, police said video shows Lewis running toward McKnight in a cafe area of a building and punching him twice in the face. McKnight then fatally shot Lewis, police said in the affidavit.

A witness told police the two had fought before the shooting.

In a police interview, McKnight said a fight began when he was using the bathroom inside a building and another person, who was with Lewis, banged on the door. McKnight said that he shot Lewis.

McKnight's lawyer did not respond to request for comment.

Also Friday, D.C. police arrested a 21-year-old man in the Nov. 20 killing of Gary Lavon Love III, 29, of Southeast Washington. The suspect, Roy Jordan of Southeast, was charged with first-degree murder while armed.

Love was shot in front of a convenience store on South Capitol Street SW. Police said in a court affidavit that Love and Jordan were inside the convenience store but did not interact.

A short time later, police said, Love left the store. Jordan then left and began to fire at him. Love shot back, then was struck by Jordan's gunfire and fell to the ground, according to the affidavit.

Love was pronounced dead the next day.

Antoini Jones, the attorney listed for Jordan in court records, declined to comment.

On Monday, police charged another man in a homicide. The U.S. Marshals Fugitive Task Force arrested Eliexander Lopez-Burgos, 23, in the Nov. 16 shooting of Carlos Javier-Blanco Fernandez, 38, who was killed on an empty lot along New York Avenue in Northeast Washington.

Police said he is charged an in arrest warrant filed in D.C. Superior Court with first-degree murder while armed. The suspect, found in Glendale, Colo., will undergo an extradition process to be returned to D.C. It could not be immediately be determined whether Lopez-Burgos has an attorney.

The shooting occurred about 5:15 p.m. near Bladensburg Road. Police said they believe the suspect and the victim knew each other. No other details of the killing have been disclosed.

Also Monday, police identified victims of two weekend shootings.

On Saturday afternoon, Michael Hansley, 38, was killed in the 1700 block of Benning Road NE, police said. Efforts to reach relatives of Hansley were not successful.

Less than 24 hours later, Dionte Claytor, 26, was killed in the 3000 block of Martin Luther King Jr. Ave SE.

"I loved him," said his father, Kenneth Claytor, 46. "He was funny, and he was kind of sensitive, because he's a Scorpio. I was protective of him."