Metro
Traffic deaths rising in D.C.

Luz Lazo 
1,498 words
27 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

The number of traffic fatalities in the nation's capital has risen to a 16-year high this year, with incidents of reckless driving and speeding igniting a wave of road safety legislation after earlier attempts to stem the carnage had little effect.

With just days left in the year, D.C. has recorded at least 49 traffic fatalities - 17 more than at the same time last year and the most in a single year since 2007, according to D.C. crash data. That number is up from 26 in 2015, when Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) pledged to prioritize traffic safety and bring the number of road deaths to zero by 2024.

City residents and safety advocates say the bloodshed on D.C. roads, which worsened during the pandemic amid a shift in how people move around the city, is the result of shortcomings in enforcement, road improvements and resources assigned to safety initiatives. The deaths and injuries - as many as 6,000 this year - have ignited protests and petitions, and inspired fresh legislation targeting drivers with dangerous driving records.

Bowser administration officials say the 2024 target was too ambitious but also point to progress in keeping road users safe. The city in recent years has doubled its number of traffic cameras, raised fines for driving infractions, reduced speed limits and added restrictions on making right turns on red lights.

"Zero is always our goal," said Sharon Kershbaum, interim director of the District Department of Transportation. "We knew this was never going to be a quick fix. This is a marathon."

The District's increase in traffic deaths counters a national downward trend in the past year after a deadly surge early in the pandemic. Road deaths nationwide fell by 3.3 percent in the first half of this year compared with 2022, although the number remained higher than before the pandemic.

The District and nine states reported at least a 10 percent increase in traffic fatalities this year.

"It will be difficult to pinpoint a particular reason other than the fact that D.C. is, unfortunately, suffering from the same trends that the nation has and appears to be slower to reverse the negative trend," said Ken Kolosh, statistics manager at the nonprofit National Safety Council.

In D.C., officials point to more collisions involving speeding that resulted in multiple casualties, renewing calls for repeat offenders to face tougher consequences. The increase in deaths from 2022 to 2023 stems from a doubling in the number of fatalities among drivers, passengers and motorcyclists, as opposed to fatalities involving pedestrians, cyclists and scooter users.

Among the dead was Andy Cariño, 22, who police say was killed in February as he drove at a high speed through the Langdon neighborhood in Northeast Washington. In March, three men - a Lyft driver and his two passengers - died when a woman sped her SUV into their vehicle on Rock Creek Parkway. Another crash in April left three people dead after their vehicle plunged into the Anacostia River.

"These are numbers that we haven't seen in over a decade, and it doesn't have to be this way. Crashes are preventable," Christy Kwan, a Northeast Washington resident and safety advocate, told more than 100 people last month as they rallied for safer roads at a playground. "Urge your elected officials to follow through on their commitment to end this traffic violence."

A proposal before the D.C. Council aims to give city agencies more enforcement power to target repeat offenders, including drivers who accumulate fines for speeding and reckless driving - even if they pay the fines - while ensuring licenses are revoked for those with multiple DUI convictions.

The bill, expected to receive a vote in early January, would empower the D.C. attorney general to bring a civil suit against city and non-city residents with records of dangerous driving in D.C., including to recoup fines and pursue the revocation of licenses. It would create a new point system for booting or towing vehicles with a history of traffic fines. The proposal also would seek to cap the ability of drivers with a history of speeding to travel above a certain speed.

"We have legislation that is going to significantly change the way accountability works, and we have to be able to move it forward," said council member Charles Allen (D-Ward 6), who introduced the bill in July.

The proposal seeks to remedy lax city oversight that was exposed after the March 15 crash in which Nakita Walker, who had five prior DUIs and a valid D.C. driver's license, crashed her SUV into a sedan, killing the three men in the ride-hailing vehicle. Police had pulled her over for speeding moments before the crash, but she sped away, driving up to 100 mph before striking the Honda head-on, according to court records.

Among other changes, D.C. police have launched weekly checkpoints at intersections where crash data indicate a high number of traffic violations. This past fall, DDOT doubled the city's number of traffic cameras in response to dangerous road behavior, saying it plans to add another 140 devices by spring. At that point, the city's 477 traffic cameras would be more than three times the number the District had at the beginning of this year.

Bowser's most recent update of the Vison Zero initiative she launched in 2015 acknowledges shortcomings in meeting goals, saying the original vision of "achieving zero deaths by 2024 ... was ambitious and has not been without its challenges." She said she expects a "comprehensive refresh" of the city's Vision Zero plan next year.

Earlier this year, an audit by the Office of the D.C. Auditor criticized Bowser's commitment to traffic safety, citing unmet goals and a rise in traffic deaths. The report found Bowser didn't adequately fund Vision Zero, while saying the program also was hampered by a lack of oversight.

"The Bowser Administration failed to follow the ambitious announcement in 2015 with appropriate resources in both funding and manpower," D.C. Auditor Kathy Patterson wrote in the March report.

The audit found that while Bowser's budget included funding for the program starting in 2016, major investments weren't requested for three years until the creation of a Vision Zero division, which took another year to fund. Charlie Willson, director of D.C.'s Vision Zero Office, noted in an interview that initiatives are embedded into various agencies and programs across the city government.

Willson said while the increase in traffic deaths is concerning, traffic data show improvements in reducing major injuries and encouraging signs that some driving behavior is improving. A recent study of the District's camera program found that across 21 locations studied, speeding decreased, injury crashes fell by 30 percentage points, and the number of citations dropped by one-third after a year.

He cited road improvements, including signal and pedestrian changes at hundreds of locations, and progress to reduce the speed limit on major corridors. The construction of about 30 miles of protected bike lanes since Vision Zero was announced has improved bike travel, he said, while a bus priority network remains a key priority of the Vision Zero strategy to get more people out of personal vehicles.

But some residents and elected leaders say the administration has moved too slowly. In the spring, Bowser directed $578 million in expected revenue from new traffic cameras to help close the city's budget shortfall - money that was supposed to boost traffic safety efforts.

More recently, safety advocates blasted Bowser and DDOT for stepping back from a plan to issue tickets fining drivers who block city bus lanes $200. The city said it needed to cut the fine for blocking bus lanes in half, then postponed enforcement. The decision came after the agency abruptly abandoned a plan to begin issuing tickets in mid-September. The city said it expects to start ticketing in January.

Residents and advocates say it would take a significant shake-up of the Vision Zero strategy to significantly reduce the city's traffic deaths.

Nearly half of traffic-related fatalities this year in D.C. involved people walking, or riding a bike or scooter; 19 were pedestrians, two were bicyclists and two were on a scooter. Six were on motorcycles or mopeds, and 20 were drivers or passengers. Three crashes resulted in multiple casualties. About half of the fatal crashes occurred overnight.

The victims came from all backgrounds and ages, and the circumstances of their deaths vary, with no single cause to be blamed, officials said. Yet investigators point to speeding and distractions as major concerns citywide.

"Managing speeds, managing roadway conflicts are the things that we want to continue to address," Willson said. "We don't have all the answers, but we do have a plan. We are pursuing the strategies that have worked elsewhere."