Metro
Local Digest

523 words
1 June 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Police investigate pair of homicides in SE

A 41-year-old man who was stabbed a week ago in Anacostia has died, D.C. police said.

Fitsum Ayele Mamo of Southeast Washington died at a hospital Saturday, two days after police said he was stabbed in the 1900 block of 14th Street SE.

The incident occurred about noon last Thursday. Police said another man also was stabbed but described his injuries as not life-threatening.

Police described the apparent motive as "domestic in nature" but did not elaborate.

Police arrested Asmerom Ghebrekidan, 51, in connection with the stabbings shortly after they occurred. Ghebrekidan had initially been charged with assault with intent to kill, but court records show he is now charged with second-degree murder while armed.

A D.C. Superior Court judge ordered Ghebrekidan detained until a court hearing June 8.

Charging documents filed in court say the victim was struck with an ax during an argument outside an apartment building. The documents say a bystander disarmed the assailant and held him until police arrived.

Efforts to reach Ghebrekidan's attorney on Wednesday were not successful.

Authorities have also identified a woman who was fatally stabbed Monday in an apartment near Nationals Park as Regina Morris, 52, of Southeast Washington.

Police said officers conducting a welfare check found Morris's body about 2:45 p.m. inside a residence in the first block of Potomac Avenue SE.

No arrest has been made in Morris's slaying.

- Peter Hermann

VIRGINIA

Two charged in double homicide in Fairfax

Police arrested two people in connection with the killing of two men at a Fairfax County apartment complex on Monday, according to a news release.

Police said Wednesday that they charged Vladimir Garcia Montes, 18, of Falls Church and a 17-year-old, whom they did not identify, with robbery resulting in death in the incident.

Jonas Skinner, 20, of Ashburn and Braden Deahl, 18, of Arlington were killed, police said Tuesday, and two juveniles were stabbed and wounded.

Everyone was known to one another, police said. Officials said they found pounds of marijuana at the scene and a backpack filled with narcotics. A knife was also found, police said Monday.

Online records show Deahl was a senior at Washington-Liberty High School who played on the soccer team, and a school spokesman confirmed that he was a student at the school. Attempts to reach Skinner's family were unsuccessful; Deahl's family told a reporter Tuesday that they did not wish to speak about the case.

The incident occurred about 3:30 p.m. Monday in the 2200 block of Pimmit Run Lane. Police said that they were called about a shooting and that when officers arrived, they found Skinner shot dead in the laundry room.

Deahl was found with a stab wound in the apartment complex's parking lot and was taken to a hospital, where he died. Two teenagers suffering from stab wounds were also found in the parking lot and taken to a hospital with injuries that were not considered to be life-threatening.

- Olivia Diaz