Metro
Suspected cocaine found at fatal gun battle with police in downtown D.C.

Peter Hermann 
463 words
26 November 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C05
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A man who was fatally shot by a U.S. Park Police officer during a gun battle south of Logan Circle in downtown Washington on Wednesday had suspected cocaine, according to a D.C. police spokesman and an offense report.

The Park Police officer who shot the man also was wounded, according to authorities. A Park Police spokesman said the officer remained hospitalized Friday, recovering from gunshot wounds to the body and legs. Police have not commented further on the officer's condition, and have not released an identity.

According to the police report made public Friday by D.C. police, who are leading the investigation, authorities also recovered a gray Nissan Sentra and a Glock 23 semiautomatic handgun. A police photo of the gun appears to show an extended magazine to hold additional bullets.

The man who died has been identified as Turell Delonte Campbell, 30, of Northeast Washington. Efforts to reach his family were not successful on Friday. An attorney who represented him in recent arrests declined to comment.

The shooting occurred about 2:30 p.m. A spokesman for the U.S. Park Police has said officers observed a "suspected drug violation" near 12th Street and Massachusetts Avenue NW. It is near Edmund Burke Park, a small triangle-shaped federal park between Massachusetts Avenue and 11th and L streets, overseen by the National Park Service.

The Park Police spokesman did not describe the suspected violation but said one Park Police officer pursued Campbell on foot north on 12th Street and right onto M Street, where the shooting occurred. The spokesman said the officer and Campbell had an "exchange of gunshots."

The D.C. police report says officers recovered as evidence a "clear plastic bag of what appeared to be crack cocaine." Paris Lewbel, a D.C. police spokesman, said investigators believe the suspected drugs belonged to Campbell.

At the time of the shooting, D.C. Superior Court records show that Campbell was on probation after he pleaded guilty in February to possession with intent to distribute drugs.

The conviction stemmed from his arrest in Southeast Washington in December 2020 in which police said they found drugs in his pocket and a gun in a vehicle he was driving. Court records show he was sentenced to two years, all of it suspended, and 18 months probation.

Court records also show that U.S. Park Police officers arrested Campbell in August 2021. They said in an affidavit they saw him make a suspected drug deal at 12th and L streets NW, steps from where the incident began on Friday.

A Superior Court judge found Campbell not guilty at a bench trial, court records show.