Metro
Defense lawyer indicted on sex assault charges

Keith L. Alexander                Peter Hermann 
674 words
11 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B02
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A longtime criminal defense lawyer in the District has been indicted by a grand jury on rape and other charges for what a D.C. police report says was "forced, unwanted sexual contact" with a woman who told authorities she was choked and rendered unconscious during the incident late last year.

The lawyer, Jonathan Jeffress, 51, a partner in the Washington law firm KaiserDillon and a former federal public defender, appeared in D.C. Superior Court for an arraignment Tuesday, with his legs and wrists shackled. He pleaded not guilty to five charges related to the alleged sexual assault.

Superior Court Judge Robert Okun released Jeffress pending prosecution, ordering him to stay away from his accuser and to check in weekly by telephone with the court's pretrial services office.

Jeffress, whose next court appearance is set for Oct. 20, said in a statement after the hearing that the sexual encounter was "consensual" and that the woman is a "professional acquaintance."

The woman contacted police shortly after midnight Jan. 20 and said the incident had occurred a month earlier, on Dec. 21, between 5:15 p.m. and 5:30 p.m. near her home in Northeast Washington, according to a D.C. police incident report.

Jeffress's indictment alleged first- and third-degree sexual assault and other crimes.

Jeffress surrendered to D.C. police Tuesday morning for arrest processing, including fingerprinting, and then appeared in manacles in Superior Court. Police declined to elaborate on the case beyond a brief narrative contained in the publicly available incident report.

Prosecutors did not describe details of the incident in court documents, as they do in many criminal cases in the District. The police incident report said the woman was rendered unconscious by "Asphyxiation/Choke/Strangle" and was "in fear for her life."

The KaiserDillon firm, where Jeffress is a partner, specializes in white-collar criminal defense work and Title IX school-related sexual discrimination and harassment cases.

In a statement released after the hearing, William Pittard, the firm's managing partner, called the allegations against Jeffress "a stark contrast to the partner we have known and worked closely with for many years" and said the firm looked "forward to his acquittal."

Jeffress said in his statement that the incident involved a woman he had known for two years and had met with four times, including the day of the alleged assault.

He said a meeting over coffee led to "a brief consensual encounter."

"There is no world in which I would ever do what I have been accused of in this case," he said, adding that his arrest was based on "one person's uncorroborated, false allegations."

Jeffress said evidence on his behalf includes "audio recordings, video surveillance tapes, texts and emails" that he predicted will lead to his vindication.

Through his attorneys, Jeffress asked for a trial to be held by the end of the year and said he wants the trial to be before a judge, not a jury. The prosecution objected to having a bench trial.

A final decision has not been made.

Jeffress is from a family of lawyers, including his father, William H. Jeffress, who in 2006 represented Vice President Dick Cheney's former chief of staff, I. Lewis "Scooter" Libby, who was accused of lying to federal agents who were investigating the leaking of a CIA operative's identity.

In court Tuesday, Okun, a former assistant U.S. attorney in the District, alerted both sides in the case that he had worked with Jeffress's sister Amy, a former prosecutor in the office who became the Justice Department's attaché in London before joining the law firm Arnold & Porter.

The U.S. attorney's office in the District has recused itself from prosecuting Jeffress, and the case is being handled by Daniel Salem, a federal prosecutor in the Northern District of West Virginia. The U.S. attorney's office there declined to comment on the case.