Metro
Local Digest

547 words
15 August 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Man is fatally shot in Northwest, police say

A person is dead following a shooting Monday morning in the 800 block of 10th Street NE, D.C. police said.

Police said that at about 11:25 a.m., officers responded to a report of a shooting. They found a man, unconscious and not breathing, suffering from apparent gunshot wounds.

Police said the incident was a homicide but did not release additional information about the circumstances of the shooting or the victim.

The slaying comes as the city continues to grapple with crime, with 19 homicides so far in August, 16 of which occurred in the first six days of the month. Killings are up 25 percent this year over the same period in 2022.

- Omari Daniels

1 dead in shooting in Kenilworth, police say

D.C. police are investigating a fatal shooting that occurred Saturday night in the Kenilworth neighborhood of Northeast.

The shooting happened about 10:40 p.m. in the 1500 block of Kenilworth Avenue NE, near Route 295. Police said two men were shot. One was pronounced dead at the scene, and the other was taken to a hospital with life-threatening injuries, authorities said.

Police identified the slain victim as Brent Hayward, 33, of Gainesville, Va. No other details were provided.

- Peter Hermann

MARYLAND

Police identify teen killed in shooting

A 16-year-old boy was fatally shot Saturday morning in the Clinton area, Prince George's County police said.

Officers responded about 2:40 a.m. to a reported shooting at a gas station in the 9800 block of Piscataway Road, police said. Inside, they found Robert Isiah Walker of Clinton with a gunshot wound. He was pronounced dead at the scene.

Investigators do not believe the shooting was random, police said. They are working to identify suspects and determine the circumstances of the shooting.

- Jasmine Hilton

Three killed in fire in Outer Banks, N.C.

Three people from Maryland were killed in a cottage fire Friday morning in the Outer Banks of North Carolina, an official said.

The fire occurred at a cottage in Kill Devil Hills, N.C., according to Rachel Tackett, a spokeswoman for the town.

Tackett said in an email Monday that 13-year-old Sienna Farr of Silver Spring and married couple Colleen Cohan, 64, and William Deeg, 68, of Ashton died in the fire.

She said three others were injured: Farr's mother and sister, Laura Volk, 48, and Sadie Farr, 16; and Volk's boyfriend, David Brewer, 55.

Volk and Brewer are in stable condition and being treated in the burn unit at Sentara Norfolk General Hospital in Virginia, Tackett said. Sadie Farr was treated at the Outer Banks Hospital and released, the official said.

The Kill Devil Hills fire marshal, the Dare County fire marshal and the North Carolina State Bureau of Investigation are working to determine the cause of the fire, Tackett said.

"Fires of this magnitude can take quite some time to determine an actual cause," Tackett said in the email. "There [are] a lot of pieces that go into the puzzle; however, our teams are well trained at doing this and they continue to work diligently in [an] attempt to reach a conclusion."

- Omari Daniels