Metro
Local Digest

389 words
15 February 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Vehicle hits, kills pedestrian in SE

A pedestrian was killed Monday night in Southeast Washington, D.C. police said.

Wayne Brown Savoy, 63, of Southeast was lying in a southbound lane of the 2700 block of Martin Luther King Jr. Avenue SE about 8:10 p.m. when he was struck and dragged, authorities said. He died at the scene, said Officer Hugh Carew, a police spokesman.

The site is near the St. Elizabeths Hospital campus.

- Martin Weil

MARYLAND

Man is found dead

after Pr. George's fire

A man was found dead late Monday after a house fire in Prince George's County, the fire department said. Another person was critically injured.

The man was found after a blaze was reported about 10:30 p.m. in a house in the 8400 block of Schultz Road, in the Clinton area, the department said.

Another resident of the two-story single-family house was removed and taken to a hospital with life-threatening injuries, according to the fire department. A third person was taken to a hospital for evaluation. The cause of the fire is under investigation.

- Martin Weil

Officials: 2 fatally shot in Charles County

Two men were killed, and a third was critically wounded, in Charles County on Monday in an apparent outbreak of gunfire, the county sheriff's office said.

All three were found in a car on the side of Route 210, said Diane Richardson, a spokeswoman for the sheriff's office.

The car was similar to one that reportedly had driven away from a place where police had been notified of gunshots, she said.

The gunfire was reported about 2 p.m. on Shelton Court in a townhouse neighborhood in Indian Head, Richardson said. The car was found four or five miles away, at Laurel Drive.

Investigators were working Monday night to determine what happened, Richardson said. Authorities think the shooting might have been confined to the three people found in the car.

Although exact ages were not known, all appeared to be in their late teens or early 20s, she said. Of the two who were fatally wounded, one died where the car was found and the other died after being taken to a hospital, she said. The third also was taken to a hospital.

- Martin Weil