Metro
More tests ordered for defendant in stabbing

Keith L. Alexander 
388 words
29 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A judge on Friday ordered additional testing and collection of past mental health records for the man charged with a seemingly random March knife attack on a staffer for Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.).

At a brief hearing Friday, D.C. Superior Court Judge Anthony Epstein said a clinical psychologist at St. Elizabeths Hospital, the city's psychiatric facility, determined that Glynn Neal, the 42-year-old man charged in the attack, remained incompetent for trial and must undergo additional evaluation and treatment to regain competency.

Neal was charged with assault with intent to kill in the March 25 attack, which occurred as the staffer and another man were leaving a restaurant in the H Street corridor in Northeast Washington in the late afternoon. The victim, 26-year-old Phillip Todd, was stabbed multiple times in his head and chest, suffering a brain bleed and punctured lung. He required several surgeries, federal prosecutors said.

When Neal was arrested, according to court charging documents, he told detectives that "a voice was telling him that someone was going to get him for all the things he done. So, he was waiting right there to get the someone."

The attack occurred a day after Neal had been released from a federal prison into a District shelter, on supervised probation. In 2011, Neal was convicted of obstruction of justice, threats to kidnap or injure a person, and forcing a person into prostitution.

After about six months in D.C. jail following his arrest in the attack, Neal was transferred to St. Elizabeths for evaluation.

On Thursday, in a written report from the hospital to the judge, Neal's psychologist said doctors needed more time to evaluate Neal. Doctors also requested his medical records from the Bureau of Prisons.

The clinical psychologist, Lauren Price, wrote that there "appears to be global deficits" in Neal's understanding of his case and the legal process. Price said Neal informed doctors that he had previously been treated by D.C. mental health professionals and also while he was in prison. Price said hospital staffers were unable to identify any such treatments via city records, and that is why they were seeking his prison medical records.

Neal's next hearing is scheduled for December.