Metro
Officer shot just out of academy

Peter Hermann 
741 words
21 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A D.C. police officer who authorities said was wounded Thursday in a fatal exchange of gunfire with a man in Southeast Washington had graduated from the police academy three weeks earlier, the department said in a statement Friday night.

That officer, whom authorities have not publicly identified, was discharged from the hospital Friday afternoon, a police spokesman said. Officials did not describe where or how many times he was struck.

Police identified the man who was killed as Arthur Porter, 33, of Northwest Washington. Acting police chief Pamela A. Smith told reporters Thursday that at least two officers fired at the man during a foot pursuit that ended in the 2800 block of Gainesville Street SE, lined with two- and three-story apartment buildings.

"Today's incident is another reminder of the dangers that our officers face when dealing with illegal firearms in the city," Smith said. Violent crime in D.C. is up nearly 40 percent this year compared with the same period in 2022. Homicides are up 34 percent, with gun violence frequently cited as a primary contributor.

D.C. police officers have shot six people this year. Thursday's incident was the first that was fatal, according to a department spokesman. Police have said a man fatally shot himself during an encounter with officers this year. And a U.S. Park Police officer and a deputy with the U.S. Marshals Service each fatally shot a person in separate incidents this year.

Police said the wounded officer graduated from the academy Sept. 29 as part of Recruit Class 2023-01. The department published photos from the graduation ceremony on social media Oct. 3.

The wounded officer was among 21 members who had completed 28 weeks of training and had just embarked on his four months of field training with a more experienced officer. Officials said that certified training officer, on the force 15 years, was with him Thursday night.

The chairman of the police labor union did not respond to requests for comment.

The D.C. police department has been struggling with staffing.

As of last month, there were 3,328 sworn officers on the force, the lowest number in a halfcentury. The District has offered signing bonuses and other incentives to boost hiring, which has struggled to keep up with attrition.

Departments across the nation are experiencing similar challenges, with low morale, high crime and a competitive job market among the most cited reasons.

The police union has blamed laws enacted by the D.C. Council that it says restrict efforts to confront criminals; lawmakers have denied that assertion. Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) has proposed new laws to strengthen law enforcement and has received pushback from some council members and support from others.

Thursday's incident occurred shortly before 5 p.m., when two 911 calls were made reporting that a man with a gun was arguing with a woman, Smith said. One of the callers provided a description, the police chief said.

Smith said officers located a man - later identified as Porter - who matched the description on Gainesville Street, in the Naylor Gardens area a few blocks from the Prince George's County border. The chief said the man ran as officers approached and exchanged gunfire with at least two of them.

Police said bullets struck one officer and Porter. Officials said the wounded officer was airlifted to a hospital by helicopter. They said Porter died shortly after arriving at a hospital.

Authorities did not provide additional specifics on injuries or wounds. Two other officers were injured, though not seriously, during the pursuit, officials said.

Efforts to reach Porter's relatives on Friday were not successful.

Smith said a gun was recovered at the scene. Police have five business days to publicly release body-camera video from the officers who fired, unless Porter's immediate family objects. Smith said additional information about the shooting would be provided at that time.

The chief said the wounded officer, who is on routine administrative leave pending the outcome of the investigation, "was protecting his community."

D.C. Council Chairman Phil Mendelson (D) said that "it's always unfortunate when our first responders are seriously injured in the line of duty." He said it is a "relief the officer is expected to be released and fully recover."

Michael Brice-Saddler and Clarence Williams contributed to this report.