Metro
3 teens killed in unrelated incidents across city over weekend, police say

Martin Weil                Justin George 
402 words
28 August 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Three teenagers were killed in separate incidents in D.C. over the weekend as the city continues to struggle with the pace of violence this year.

Police said the latest homicide victim was a 17-year-old from Waldorf who was fatally stabbed at a McDonald's restaurant in the 1900 block of 14th Street NW early Sunday. Police said Sunday that they have arrested a 16-year-old female suspect in the killing.

Police said Naima Liggon was stabbed sometime before 2 a.m. in an attack that took place both inside and outside the restaurant. Police found Liggon at 2:10 a.m. at a hospital after someone had driven her there, they said.

"Despite all lifesaving efforts, the victim succumbed to her injuries," D.C. police said in a statement.

Police did not release the name of the suspect because she is a juvenile. Detectives said she is also from Waldorf and was found in possession of a knife when she was arrested Sunday.

She faces a charge of second-degree murder while armed, police said.

In separate, unrelated incidents Friday evening and Saturday morning, two men, both 18, were killed in the District, police said.

Jaqiah Johnson of Southeast Washington was shot to death shortly after 7 p.m. Friday in the 2000 block of Naylor Road SE, police said.

The site is near the intersection with Minnesota Avenue SE and is in a residential area southeast of the Sousa Bridge.

Less than 10 hours later, Keni Edwards of Southeast Washington was fatally shot in the 2000 block of 10th Street NW, police said.

Edwards was found a few minutes after 4 a.m. and died at a hospital, according to police.

A second gunshot victim was found with Edwards and was treated at the scene for a graze wound, police said.

The two incidents in Northwest Washington occurred in the U Street corridor, an area known for nightlife, dining and entertainment. Concern about violence there has led to the inclusion of the corridor, among other sites, for stepped-up enforcement of a youth curfew in coming days.

The three killings bring the number of homicides in the city this year to 175, based on police data. The number is about 25percent higher than last year at this time.