Metro
Man charged in fatal Metro shooting is likely to plead insanity at trial

Keith L. Alexander 
461 words
28 November 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A man charged in a Feb. 1 shooting rampage that left a Metro employee dead and two passengers wounded will probably argue at his trial that he is not guilty by reason of insanity, a defense attorney said in court Monday.

Isaiah Trotman, 32, appeared in D.C. Superior Court as prosecutors announced that he had been indicted by a grand jury on 52 charges in the shooting, including first-degree murder while armed. The attack started on a Metrobus and ended underground on the platform of the Potomac Avenue Metro station in Southeast Washington.

Trotman, through his lawyers from the D.C. Public Defender Service, pleaded not guilty Monday, and a trial was tentatively scheduled for mid-2025. One of his attorneys, Joseph Yarbough, told prosecutors that a "not guilty by reason of insanity defense will likely be pursued."

Authorities said Trotman shot three people, including 64-year-old Robert Cunningham, a Metro mechanic who was killed when he intervened to try to save a passenger. A witness said the gunman uttered, "I'm the killmonger," as he rushed into the Potomac Avenue station at the end of the morning rush hour.

Police arrested Trotman, who worked in information technology, after he boarded a train following the shooting and a passenger managed to wrestle away his loaded firearm.

According to court records, Trotman told a person on the station platform: "I'll shoot you. I am God." Earlier, court records say, he told another person: "Look me in the face. I'm a prophet. You're going to die with me today."

After Trotman's arrest, his mother, Althea Trotman, said that two months before the shooting, she noticed that Trotman seemed unusually subdued, and she believed he was suffering from depression.

In interviews with The Washington Post, Trotman's mother and a former girlfriend said Trotman struggled with depression. They described events that may have contributed to his downward spiral, including the death of his father and a breakup with the ex-girlfriend that ended a sometimes-volatile relationship.

At Monday's hearing, Trotman sat motionless, staring ahead as his attorneys argued for their client to be released pending trial.

Yarbough said Trotman was diagnosed with schizophrenia and was receiving monthly medication injections administered by staff members at the D.C. jail. Yarbough said his client should be allowed to return to his Southeast home, where he could continue receiving medical treatment, which Yarbough said Trotman did not receive before his arrest.

Assistant U.S. Attorney Michelle Jackson argued that Trotman remains a danger to the public and should not be released. Judge Maribeth Raffinan agreed, ordering that Trotman remain jailed.