Metro
Arrest made in robberies along trail

Peter Hermann                Omari Daniels 
686 words
1 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

D.C. police have arrested an 18-year-old man in connection with several robberies that targeted people walking along or near sections of the Metropolitan Branch Trail in Northeast Washington, according to authorities and court documents.

The 18 attacks spanned October and November, police said, and were mostly concentrated between Rhode Island Avenue and Monroe Street, where the trail roughly parallels Metro's Red Line and cuts through areas with residences, shops and taverns.

In many cases, at least one assailant was armed with a gun, police said. And in nearly all the attacks, police said, Apple iPhones were taken and passcodes demanded from victims. Police said in court documents that fraudulent transactions were made or attempted using the phones over Venmo and Amazon.

D.C. police Cmdr. Sylvan Altieri, who heads the 5th District, said detectives are searching for at least one other person. "We would really appreciate if the public has any additional information so we can get this other suspect apprehended," he said.

Altieri said police deployed officers on mountain bikes and engaged the department's crime suppression team to protect people using the trail and to find assailants.

Altieri said detectives arrested Jalique Wiseman, 18, of Northeast Washington after two robberies occurred minutes apart on Tuesday afternoon near Chancellor's Row, an apartment complex three blocks south of Monroe Street and along the trail. Police said a second person escaped.

Wiseman was charged Wednesday in two robberies that occurred Oct. 16 and Nov. 19. Police said in an arrest affidavit filed in D.C. Superior Court that they think those two robberies and 16 others between Oct. 2 and Tuesday are connected. Police said guns were used in 11 of the 18 robberies.

A spokeswoman for the U.S. attorney's office for D.C. said the investigation into the other robberies remains open. In court on Wednesday, a judge ordered Wiseman detained and set a hearing for Dec. 5.

Police said in the arrest affidavit that Wiseman "denied any knowledge of the robberies." Wiseman's attorney did not respond to an interview request.

Robberies in the District have soared nearly 70 percent this year, compared with the same period in 2022. The ones in this case targeted people using the Metropolitan Branch Trail, a popular walking and biking trail that runs four miles between Union Station and Fort Totten, and extends into Silver Spring along streets and pathways.

Police said in the affidavit that Wiseman was arrested shortly after two robberies occurred at 2:45 p.m. on the trail near Eighth and Franklin streets NE and then five minutes later a few blocks north, near Sixth Street and Chancellor's Way NE, close to a playground.

In the first attack, the victim said at least one of the people was armed with a black handgun and yelled, "Give me our phone or I'll shoot you in the leg," according to the affidavit. In the second robbery, police said the assailants grabbed a woman's purse and struck her in the arm with a gun.

Police said in the affidavit that detectives quickly linked those two robberies and said one of the people believed to be involved was wearing a red, white and black Moncler jacket that matched what one of the assailants was wearing in a Nov. 19 robbery. Police said they identified that person as Wiseman.

The Nov. 19 robbery occurred about 9:20 p.m. on an elevated walkway near the Rhode Island Metro station. Police said two people had just left a pub when they were pushed into a railing, as one assailant tried to grab a phone while the other threatened them with a gun.

"Give up the phone," the assailant said, according to the police affidavit. "Don't be stupid."

Police said the victim gave up the phone and the password.

In the affidavit, police said that Wiseman lives near where many of the robberies occurred and that he or family members have been linked to accounts accessed on stolen phones.