Metro
Local Digest

388 words
23 August 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Md. man fatally shot in Anacostia, police say

A 44-year-old man from Maryland was fatally shot Monday morning in Southeast Washington's Anacostia neighborhood, according to D.C. police.

The shooting occurred about 9:15 a.m. in the 2200 block of 16th Street SE, three blocks from where five people were shot on Good Hope Road, three fatally, on Aug. 5.

Police did not say whether there is any connection between the two shootings. No arrests have been made in either case.

Police identified the victim of Monday's shooting as Robert Ferguson of Silver Spring. Authorities said he died at a hospital.

The number of homicides in the District has reached 169, almost a 30 percent increase over this time last year.

- Peter Hermann

12-year-old arrested in carjacking attempt

A 12-year-old boy was arrested in connection with an attempted carjacking that occurred Sunday afternoon in the Anacostia neighborhood, D.C. police said.

The boy had a gun in his possession at the time of the arrest, police said.

The increase in carjackings has become a symbol of violent crime in the District and a focus of concern over personal safety on the streets. Many carjackings have been carried out by young people, but few of the suspects are identified as being as young as 12.

In some cases, younger juveniles have been arrested or were described in the incidents, but often as part of larger groups and not frequently as being armed.

Sunday's incident occurred a few minutes after 1 p.m. at Martin Luther King Jr. Avenue and U Street SE, according to the police account. The address is near the heart of the Anacostia neighborhood and a short distance from the 11th Street Bridge over the Anacostia River.

A male approached the victim and demanded their keys, police said. The would-be robber held an object in his waistband that the victim thought was a gun, police said.

The victim refused to surrender the keys and the would-be carjacker ran away. Officers later arrested the 12-year-old, police said.

Police said they charged the boy, who lives in Southeast Washington, with two offenses. One was armed carjacking, and the other was carrying a pistol without a license.

- Martin Weil