Metro
Union Station's owner, and Amtrak's bid to change it

Luz Lazo 
1,450 words
17 September 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C02
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

An eminent domain case moving through U.S. District Court has put a spotlight on the ownership and management of Union Station - a critical gateway to the nation's capital.

Amtrak is seeking possession of the station's leasing rights - now controlled by a private company - to advance long-planned improvements. The case highlights the complexities of a station governance structure in place since the 1980s, which includes federal, nonprofit and private entities.

Amtrak, a station tenant, says taking over Union Station is necessary to modernize the nation's second-busiest intercity train hub, which has suffered financial and ridership blows during the pandemic.

Here is who owns the station, what private and public players have a stake, and why Amtrak is seeking a larger role at the historic rail hub.

Who owns and operates Union Station?

The Federal Railroad Administration (FRA), an agency within the U.S. Transportation Department, owns the Union Station complex. The department took ownership more than four decades ago after the Union Station Redevelopment Act of 1981 authorized the station's lease transfer from the Interior Department, which had operated a short-lived National Visitor Center at the site. The station, which opened in 1907 as a railroad terminal, originally was owned by the Washington Terminal Company, a private corporation owned by the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Company and the Philadelphia, Baltimore and Washington Railroad Company, according to historical records.

Although the U.S. government owns the station, it has been leased to and operated by other entities since the 1980s, when the government sought help to restore the decaying property. At the time, the station had been through a troubled period of deterioration and low foot traffic. Extensive water damage in February 1981 resulted in the structure being declared unsafe, and passengers had to walk around the building to get to trains.

To save the facility, the U.S. government passed the Redevelopment Act, and in 1985 authorized the nonprofit Union Station Redevelopment Corp. (USRC) to oversee the property for 99 years. Under the lease agreement with the Transportation Department, the USRC has an oversight role in the management of the complex, including the station and its adjacent garage. The lease also required the USRC to sublease most of the station to a real estate developer.

Union Station Venture was selected as the private developer and created a retail center with more than 100 businesses and restaurants, including a 40-vendor food court and a movie theater that made Union Station a destination in the late 1980s for shopping, dining and entertainment. In 2007, the company sold its interest to New York developer Ben Ashkenazy's Union Station Investco (USI) for $160 million. That sublease is in effect until 2084.

Real estate investment management company Rexmark took ownership of USI after a foreclosure case last year and it is now overseeing the station.

Why did Amtrak file the eminent domain case?

USI, under the Rexmark umbrella, subleases space to Amtrak. The passenger railroad rents a small portion of the station - about 13.4 percent - for its railroad operations, which includes ticketing counter space and the concourse area before passengers go out to the platform. Amtrak owns the station's platforms and railroad tracks.

In a bold move last year, Amtrak filed the eminent domain case in U.S. District Court, seeking to take possession of the USI sublease - about 425,000 square feet of the station, which includes the entire property except the parking garage. Under federal code, Amtrak has the authority to use eminent domain to acquire interests in property necessary for the use of intercity passenger rail operations.

Amtrak says it hopes to take over operations and management of the train hall to pursue multibillion-dollar investments at the station, including a long-planned concourse expansion and major repairs to a tunnel that runs under the station "in serious need of repair or replacement." In a court hearing Monday, Amtrak chief executive Stephen Gardner said taking USI out of the equation would remove a layer of governance at the station and allow Amtrak to directly negotiate improvements with USRC and the FRA.

What changes is Amtrak proposing if it's granted rights?

Amtrak is seeking immediate possession of the station as the rest of the eminent domain case winds through court in a process to determine fair compensation that could take several months, if not years, to settle. Gardner said if that request is granted, possibly as soon as this year, Amtrak is ready to make changes in time for the holiday travel season. Among the changes: adding seating and signage in the main hall, creating a dedicated area for Amtrak police, increasing security surveillance and expanding customer service beyond the area Amtrak already leases.

The plan also calls for a children's area in the main hall, similar to playgrounds at some U.S. airports. Gardner said Amtrak would expand its lounge area for first-class passengers, expand and modernize baggage facilities, create a dedicated space for crew members and return its headquarters offices to the building. Amtrak's administrative offices moved out of Union Station five years ago after lease negotiations with USI fell through.

Where does the federal government stand on the case?

Although the federal government, including the Transportation Department, has not taken an official stance in Amtrak's eminent domain case, the railroad's decision to pursue the sublease was backed by federal leaders.

Amtrak's board of directors in March 2022 voted in favor of a resolution approving the acquisition of the property interest, saying the move would allow Amtrak to "directly invest in [Washington Union Station] in a more efficient and effective manner, making the most benefit for intercity and public transit riders." The resolution was approved unanimously by the board, which includes a designee of Transportation Secretary Pete Buttigieg and FRA Administrator Amit Bose.

What's the next step in the legal battle?

Attorneys for USI have challenged Amtrak's authority to use eminent domain, saying the carrier hasn't met requirements under U.S. law to take over Union Station, including proving the entire property is needed for transportation operations. They also have said Amtrak could seek more space at the station, noting that the sublease allows Amtrak to move forward with projects "without hindrance." Attorneys also have questioned Amtrak's strategy of seeking to acquire the lease, saying the railroad filed the eminent domain case within days of offering USI $250 million to acquire leasing rights.

Federal Judge Amit P. Mehta on Monday heard arguments from both sides at a hearing focused on Amtrak's request for immediate possession of the station. Meanwhile, the eminent domain case will move forward to determine the amount Amtrak would pay to Rexmark.

Amtrak made its offer to USI to buy its leasing rights for $250 million on April 6, 2022, but said the company did not respond to the offer by an April 13 deadline. A day later, the railroad filed the lawsuit and made the $250 million payment to the court, "the amount of which it estimates to be just compensation," according to the court filing, which says the amount was determined through an independent real estate appraisal.

Rexmark has said that Amtrak's offer is inadequate, citing its own independent appraisal that valued the property at $730 million.

How does the case affect expansion plans for Amtrak and Union Station?

Amtrak's quest to take over the station's leasing rights comes as the railroad is eyeing its biggest expansion in 52 years. The railroad argues that a larger role at Union Station would benefit not only local operations, but the entire Northeast Corridor. Amtrak says it expects significant growth in the next decade alongside the debut of new trains, which will require better facilities in Washington.

Amtrak recently launched $1 billion in rail yard upgrades to prepare for new trains, including an estimated $350 million investment to modernize D.C.'s Ivy City maintenance yard. Amtrak owns stations in Chicago, Philadelphia and Baltimore. It is leading major overhauls in Baltimore and Philadelphia.

The eminent domain case comes as the FRA is wrapping up an environmental study for an $8.8 billion redevelopment of the 116-year-old station. The proposed expansion calls for a transformation of Washington's busiest transit hub by 2040. It will add wide rail platforms, an integrated bus terminal, a new train hall and updated concourses lined with shops and restaurants that provide easy access to Metrorail, buses, taxis, ride-hailing, streetcars and parking. The station's historic main hall will be preserved.