Metro
Car theft ends in a fatal crash

Keith L. Alexander                Omari Daniels                Emily Davies 
837 words
28 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A 15-year-old girl, who D.C. police say was involved in a carjacking and crash that killed another girl Thursday, had been placed in the custody of the city's Department of Youth Rehabilitation Services a week earlier because she faced robbery and theft charges. But a judge said she ordered the girl released after the agency said it had no available housing for her.

The teenage girl, now charged as a juvenile with several additional crimes, was allegedly involved in an incident in which a carjacked Honda Pilot, traveling at a high speed, struck a utility pole at Brentwood Road and Bryant Street NE shortly before 2 a.m. Thursday, according to police. They said the driver, Kendra Outlaw, 16, of Northeast was killed.

Police said the girls were part of a group of young people who carjacked two vehicles - the Honda and a Toyota Camry - that were traveling together at the time of the crash. After the Honda hit the pole, police said, it flipped over and struck the Toyota, which came to a stop. The 15-year-old girl was a passenger in the Toyota, police said. They said three people got out of the Toyota and two of them ran away. The teen was arrested at the scene.

At a hearing Friday in D.C. Superior Court, the teen - wearing an oversize sweatshirt with singer Selena on the front - sat with her lawyer while her parents and other family members watched from the courtroom gallery. The D.C. attorney general's office, which prosecutes juveniles in the city, charged her with armed carjacking, unlawful entry of a stolen vehicle and conspiracy. Through her attorney, Julie Swaney, she pleaded not guilty.

The Washington Post, which generally does not identify people who are charged with crimes as juveniles, was allowed to attend the hearing on the condition that it not disclose the girl's name.

A social services worker said in court Friday that the teen had pending robbery and theft cases and a record of "poor compliance" while under house arrest. Prosecutor Julia Rupert said the teen should be put in the custody of the Department of Youth Rehabilitation Services (DYRS) in the carjacking case, and Magistrate Judge Lloyd Nolan agreed.

Later Friday, in a separate juvenile court hearing in the robbery and theft cases, Judge Andrea Hertzfeld noted that a week earlier, on Oct. 19, she had also ordered the girl held in DYRS custody, but the agency at the time had said it did not have available housing for her. Hertzfeld said that was why she had reluctantly released the girl to her parents - only to see her back in the courthouse days later, charged in a carjacking.

DYRS declined to comment on the case. Lindsey Appiah, the District's deputy mayor for public safety and justice, would not address specifics of the case, saying only: "If a judge orders a youth securely held … DYRS does not refuse such placement." By law, officials cannot talk publicly about juvenile matter.

Hertzfeld said that the agency's assertion on Oct. 19 that it did not have available housing for the girl "caused the court great concern, and a hearing was ordered to determine why this court should not hold DYRS in contempt." At the time, the girl was allowed to return home and was placed on a curfew with electronic monitoring. A court services official testified Friday that the girl let the battery in her GPS ankle device die.

With the teen now charged in a carjacking that led to a death, DYRS apparently was able to find housing for her Friday. She was placed in the agency's custody pending prosecution in the new case.

At the hearing before Nolan, D.C. police detective Cornel Keleman testified that at the scene of the crash, the girl appeared "shook, agitated and was crying." Keleman said she told detectives she wanted to return to the Toyota because she had left her purse in the back seat, where she was sitting at the time of the crash.

Keleman testified that the girl told detectives that she and about eight others would steal cars to sell later.

Keleman testified that the Honda owner was an Uber driver who had pulled to the side of the road in 3600 block of Southern Avenue SE early Thursday. The driver said three males brandishing a gun ordered her out. The driver told detectives that another vehicle, the carjacked Toyota Camry, was blocking her from driving away.

Police said the Toyota had been carjacked in Prince George's County, Md., on Wednesday, the evening before.

At one point during Keleman's testimony, the teen's father, pointing to the detective, yelled twice: "You're going to remember this day for the rest of your life!" His son-in-law quickly ushered him out of the courtroom as a deputy U.S. marshal approached.