Metro
D.C. police officer shoots man in Anacostia

Peter Hermann                Salvador Rizzo 
520 words
11 February 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B04
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A D.C. police officer shot and injured a man inside a vehicle Friday morning in the Anacostia neighborhood of Southeast Washington, according to the city's police chief.

The injured man was conscious when taken to a hospital for treatment, authorities said. Police said the officer was investigating a call that a man had struck a woman with a pipe, but the man who was shot does not appear to be the person who was reported to have attacked the woman.

The shooting occurred shortly before 10 a.m. in the 1300 block of Good Hope Road SE, near the neighborhood's main commercial strip.

The officer has been placed on administrative leave during the investigation.

Police said he activated his body camera.

D.C. Police Chief Robert J. Contee III said officers responded to the call about the woman being assaulted and were looking for the assailant.

He said one officer saw a man get into the passenger seat of a burgundy-colored Jeep that was parked on the street.

Contee said the officer asked the man to exit the car, and the man refused.

The chief, speaking after officials had watched video from the officer's body camera, said the man moved his hands, and the officer told him several times, "Stop reaching."

Police also said the female driver told the passenger to get out of the Jeep.

Contee said the officer fired his gun, striking the man. The chief said he did not know where the man was struck.

He said the officer got the man out of the vehicle and handcuffed him as the female driver took off.

Contee said police are looking for the driver and the Jeep, which is missing one of its rear hubcaps.

"We just want to talk to her and find out everything that happened," Contee said.

The police chief said once at the hospital, medical personnel found what he described as a "large quantity" of suspected drugs on the wounded man's body.

Police said no weapon has been recovered, though they noted they have not yet found the vehicle.

April Cole, a mental health counselor at the nonprofit Prestige Community Resources, a block from the shooting, said violence has become all too routine.

"It's like a normal day," Cole said. "We people have become accustomed. But it should not be. It should not be. It should not be."

Police said many people were in the area when the shooting occurred, and they urged anyone with video or photographs to contact investigators.

The department has five business days to release the name of the officer who fired and publish video from his body camera, provided the victim consents to its release.

The woman who was hit with the pipe was taken to a hospital for treatment. Police said her injuries did not appear to be life-threatening.

Friday's shooting was the first by a D.C. officer this year.

Police said D.C. officers shot five people in 2022, three of them fatally.