Metro
Man visiting his old neighborhood dies after being shot in car, police say

Rachel Weiner 
656 words
24 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C05
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Aminah Saladin didn't want a grief counselor. She wanted to make sure the man in the morgue was really her son, Tejuan Coleman. A ride-hailing driver had dropped him off Friday night at a Southeast Washington police station, where he was pronounced dead of multiple gunshot wounds. He was 31 years old.

Saladin knows how to deal with death. She sees it every day at work, as a nurse. And she saw it in the neighborhood where her older children grew up, on Stanton Road Southeast, near the Maryland border. So in 2010, when one of Coleman's friends was shot and killed, she moved the family to Gaithersburg.

"I didn't want that life for him," she said, as she waited for police to return her calls. "I told them this area was getting too dangerous. In Montgomery County, they had the freedom to walk around." But Coleman and his oldest brother missed their friends and often went back to Stanton Road to see them. Last year, he was there when shots were fired and police responded. He and another man were violently arrested in a confrontation caught on video. D.C. Council member Trayvon White Sr. (D-Ward 8) said there was "no doubt MPD officers used excessive force." Coleman, who went to the hospital, was charged with assaulting police.

Those and other charges against Coleman were dropped, and Saladin said her son was planning to sue the city over the incident. Police said an internal investigation into the 2022 arrest found that the use of force was justified.

Court records indicate he also settled a lawsuit with the city in 2014 over previous allegations of police brutality. His mother said he often faced harassment from the police while out on the street with other young men in the high-crime area.

"He's getting older, there's so many shootings around in those areas - I told him, just stop hanging around there," Saladin said. Coleman's best friend was killed in late 2019.

On Friday night, he was in the neighborhood to watch a music video being filmed.

Saladin said she went to the police station herself after hearing from Coleman's fiancée that he never came home and that there had been a shooting on Stanton Road. She was told there that police got Coleman's name from the phone used to call the ride. She then went to the morgue, where she was told they didn't need to show her a picture of the body because they could confirm Coleman's identify by his fingerprints.

"If that's my son, I could have been the one that identified him," she said with emotion in her voice. "It's all wrong."

Coleman made his own music under the name Vitobenjiii, but his mother said that as he got older he was rapping less, focusing on his job as a truck driver for a local cement company and his four children. The youngest two are 10-month-old twins; he was engaged to their mother when he died. He also helped to take care of his younger siblings, Saladin said; one brother was supposed to celebrate his 27th birthday Saturday.

Around 11 p.m. Friday, friends saw him get in an Uber. Police told Saladin that when the car pulled up to a light, another car did as well. Shots were fired from that vehicle. According to a police report, the uninjured driver took Coleman to the police station where he was pronounced dead.

"If he would have made the light and crossed," his mother said, trailing off. She hopes a traffic camera caught images of the car that held the killer.

"The police have a job, and they have to do it," Saladin said. "We're going to hold them accountable."