Metro
Officer critically wounds armed man in Northwest

Emily Davies 
361 words
18 August 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A D.C. police officer shot and critically wounded a man Thursday after authorities allege he fired multiple shots while officers tried to communicate with him.

Police first went to the 7400 block of Georgia Avenue NW after receiving a report at about 10 a.m. that a man had a gun inside an apartment and that there was a "potential domestic situation," acting D.C. police chief Pamela A. Smith said at a news conference. Officers were unable to enter the apartment or find the person who had called, Smith said.

Thirty minutes later, Smith said, officers were dispatched to the area again for the sound of gunshots "related to the prior situation." At the scene, a person flagged down the police and gave a description of the man believed to have fired the shots.

Smith said officers found that man outside and gave him orders in English and Spanish. At that point, the man pulled out a gun and fired multiple shots, Smith said. The chief said police are still investigating whether those shots were directed at officers.

Police recovered a firearm at the scene.

Smith said the man was transported to a hospital and was in critical condition as of Thursday afternoon. She said the officer who fired the shot was "okay."

"Today's incident is another reminder of the potential dangers when a firearm is introduced into a domestic situation, and the dangers that our officers face each day," Smith said.

The shooting occurred near multiple restaurants, barbershops and business offices on Georgia Avenue. By Thursday afternoon, police had blocked off much of the area. Neighbors peered over crime scene tape. Some businesses appeared to have closed for the day. Others continued serving food and cutting hair. A few people gathered on nearby porches, discussing how many shots they thought they heard earlier that day.

Police did not identify the officer who fired at the man on Thursday. D.C. law allows the agency five business days to identify officers involved in serious use-of-force cases and make videos from their body-worn cameras public.