Metro
With 264 killings, D.C. hits grim toll

Emily Davies 
574 words
20 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Twelve hours apart and 10 miles from each other, gunshots Monday ended the lives of two men and pushed the District's annual homicide count to its highest level since 1997.

In 51 weeks, 264 people have been slain.

The victims this year included a 10-year-old girl, an 81-year-old woman and a pair of siblings shot to death within seconds of each other. Every ward experienced at least one homicide, according to police data, though Wards 7 and 8, both east of the Anacostia River, were particularly hard-hit.

The last time the District came close to this year's homicide toll was in 2002, when the city recorded 262 killings, according to police data. In 1997, amid a period of municipal mismanagement and widespread social dysfunction, 302 people were killed in Washington.

The two people fatally shot in separate incidents Monday were Jihad Darden, 27, killed on a Northwest street lined with grassy front lawns; and a man whom police have not yet publicly identified, shot inside a brick apartment building in Southeast.

This year's deadly milestone is one District leaders have long feared. After the city surpassed 200 killings in September at the earliest point in a quarter-century, D.C. Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) and Police Chief Pamela A. Smith vowed to use every available tool to drive down crime.

The mayor rolled out a new public safety package that would undo or amend a number of policing changes passed in the aftermath of George Floyd's murder in 2020. Smith, in her strategic plan, discussed the police department's new "robbery suppression initiative," which uses real-time data analysis to determine some officer deployments.

D.C. Council members, too, put forward new plans to improve public safety - including one bill, introduced by council member Brooke Pinto (D-Ward 2), chairwoman of the council's public safety and judiciary committee, that would allow police to randomly search people charged with violent offenses who are on pretrial release.

Still, after a particularly deadly summer, the violence continued after autumn arrived. Sixteen people were killed in October, which was slightly down from that month last year, but included a 24-hour stretch in which four people were slain. There were 20 homicides in November, according to police data, almost double the number in 2022.

So far this month, the victims of deadly violence have included 24-year-old Tyejuan Harkum, who was supposed to spend an afternoon getting his hair cut and going to a bank to get money to help his mother pay rent. Instead, he was fatally shot before 4 p.m. in the 2600 block of Naylor Road SE.

"We're at war," his mother, Chariece Harkum, said after her son was felled by bullets. "This gun violence has gotten outrageous."

Darden, the city's 263rd homicide victim this year, was killed about 11:45 a.m. Monday in the 5400 block of Illinois Avenue NW, police said. He was taken to a hospital in a private vehicle and pronounced dead.

About 12 hours later, in the 400 block of Brandywine Street SE, officers found victim No. 264 shot to death inside a residence.

By Tuesday, police had not made an arrest in either incident, nor had they provided details on their circumstances. Efforts to reach Darden's family were not successful.