Metro
How over 2 decades of D.C. traffic tickets, about $1.3 billion, went unpaid

Luz Lazo 
1,504 words
14 May 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C02
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

About 6.2 million traffic tickets totaling nearly $1.3 billion in fines and penalties have not been paid to the District since 2000, The Washington Post found in a recent analysis of city records. That includes hundreds of thousands of dollars owed by motorists who have been repeatedly caught violating traffic rules.

The data from the D.C. Department of Motor Vehicles highlights the challenges facing the city in enforcing traffic regulations and holding drivers to account. For example, The Post found a car with Maryland tags that has 339 outstanding tickets worth $186,000 in fines and penalties.

Here's why so many people can get away without paying the fines.

Tickets are tied to vehicles, not drivers

Most of the unpaid fines - except for a small share resulting from police stops - are linked to vehicles rather than drivers because D.C. traffic cameras, as in many other jurisdictions, do not take photos of a car's occupants.

The city's 136 cameras issue thousands of tickets for speeding, red light and stop sign violations each year. But unlike police officers, cameras can't issue points on licenses. D.C. officials say even in cases of frequent offenders, the city can't properly identify the driver who committed the infractions. That means vehicles can rack up fines over years - which the car's owner is responsible for paying - but the person or people driving those cars can still keep their licenses if they don't pay.

Since 2000, more than 3 million photo-issued tickets have gone unpaid in the city for a total of $840.8 million, which includes a doubling of original fines and a 20 percent collection fee applied to outstanding tickets. An additional 2.9 million parking tickets also have gone unpaid, for an extra $398 million in fines and penalties, DMV records show. About 190,000 tickets issued by police officers, which can be tracked to drivers, account for $47.6 million in outstanding fines.

Booting, towing are top tools to target violators

The two main resources the city uses to target violators - towing and booting - have limitations. City enforcement includes four crews assigned to the booting of vehicles, which advocates and some D.C. officials say isn't adequate to target the high number of offenders. Booting can only occur when a vehicle is on public property. Meanwhile, a limited amount of tow equipment is mostly directed at enforcing rush-hour parking rules and moving vehicles from the path of road-paving crews. Some elected leaders have argued that the current level of enforcement covers such a small proportion of vehicles with unpaid tickets that it could take 25 years for eligible vehicles to be booted.

About 38,000 vehicles - a majority with Maryland and Virginia plates - have at least two unpaid parking or traffic tickets at least 60 days old, making those vehicles eligible to be booted on D.C. streets, according to ticket data issued in the past five years.

Deputy Mayor Lucinda M. Babers recently said the city is in the process of adding more booting crews, but added it's likely that offenders "are aware that we boot and tow so they may then park the vehicle in a garage or on private property," which is off-limits to city crews.

Most ticketed vehicles don't have D.C. plates

About 90 percent of outstanding tickets are linked to vehicles registered outside D.C., with nearly half to vehicles with Maryland plates. Marylanders owe the city $618 million in fines and penalties, accounting for about 2.9 million of 6.2 million outstanding tickets, according to city records. Maryland drivers also top the list of repeat offenders. About 45 percent of the 200 offenders with the most tickets and fines have Maryland tags, according to DMV records of the past five years.

Vehicles with Virginia plates account for 1.7 million unpaid tickets totaling nearly $344 million in fines and penalties since 2000. Virginia vehicles make up more than one-third of the 200 top offenders, according to city data.

With just under 670,000 outstanding tickets totaling $130 million in debt, D.C. vehicles make up the smallest share of the unpaid citations. Another $194 million in fines are linked to vehicles from states outside the Washington region.

D.C. does not have ticket reciprocity with other states

With no regional agreement to enforce automated tickets, city officials say repeat offenders keep breaking the law without consequence.

When an officer pulls someone over for speeding or another moving violation in the Washington region, jurisdictions are bound by reciprocity agreements to share information and hold drivers to account, which can lead to fines or driver's licenses being revoked. The agreement, however, doesn't apply to automated tickets. D.C. officials say they have tried to negotiate agreements that could result in the suspension of vehicle registrations of Maryland and Virginia drivers with D.C. traffic fines that reach a certain threshold. But in recent years, those negotiations have stalled. That means the only option D.C. has to target non-D.C. residents is through booting and towing of vehicles when they are parked on city streets.

High-risk drivers are not targeted

The District has no mechanism to go after drivers who accumulate thousands of dollars in traffic tickets, and in some cases, are behind the wheel of vehicles linked to violations for reckless driving. Booting and towing crews do not target vehicles with reckless driving records and D.C. police do not have a system to spot vehicles with ticket debt. City officials say it would be impossible to target high-risk drivers because city workers do not know their locations.

More than 2,100 vehicles have at least 40 outstanding tickets, according to DMV data, and about 1,200 cars are linked to fines exceeding $20,000 over the past five years.

Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) in recent days said she thinks scofflaws must be held accountable and said she expects a commission will be established this year to study traffic fines, the collection of fines and their effectiveness. The panel would then offer recommendations.

"There could be a number of different strategies," she said. "What I can't do is send one of my [Department of Public Works] workers in a confrontational situation over a car with unpaid tickets. And so I want to be able to talk amongst our team about the people who have both the power to remove vehicles, but will also be safe in the process."

The collection process is constrained

The DMV refers unpaid tickets to the city's Central Collection Unit 120 days after the last adjudication action date. This includes tickets that were not adjudicated, and tickets that were adjudicated and violators were found liable. The CCU is then responsible for collecting the delinquent debt. The unit verifies the debtor's account records and place of residence, then sends a collection letter, followed by notices of delinquencies and offers for payment plans and settlements. The debt is assigned to an outsourced collection agency, Chicago-based Harris & Harris.

Officials with the Office of the Chief Financial Officer, which oversees the CCU, said D.C. law prohibits the CCU to report delinquent debtors to credit bureaus or to garnish wages.

D.C. residents with outstanding tickets don't have access to some DMV services. For example, people with at least two unpaid tickets more than 60 days old are unable to renew a vehicle registration, gain access to vehicle inspections or obtain a commercial driver's license. The city can withhold wages of D.C. government employees who owe ticket debt, according to the Office of the Chief Financial Officer.

After 15 years, debt is gone

The CCU said that in following DMV policy, it discharges ticket debt after 15 years and "debtors are no longer responsible for the fines and fees associated with the ticket."

According to the DMV, about 70 percent of tickets are paid. That means the District collects millions of dollars annually on fines from traffic citations, including for tickets issued by cameras, police officers and parking enforcement officers. In the fiscal year that ended Sept. 30, 2022, the city received $159.2 million in fines, according to the Office of the Chief Financial Officer. Additionally, the D.C. Central Collection Unit secured another $25.2 million in delinquent debt, of which about half was associated with camera fines.

Drivers are responsible for paying fines within 30 days after the citation is issued, at which time the fine will double. Drivers can contest a ticket within 60 days. In the adjudication process, a hearing examiner reviews the case and determines whether it must be paid. The examiner can also reduce or dismiss the fine. Drivers can go through the adjudication process online, by mail or in person.