Metro
Body-camera video in fatal shooting released

Emily Davies 
996 words
27 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Body-camera videos of gunfire that wounded a rookie D.C. police officer and killed a 33-year-old man during a foot chase last week shows the injured officer falling to the ground immediately after a fellow officer, just steps behind him, opened fire. The images, released Thursday, offer insight into a rapid sequence of events outside an apartment building Oct. 19 while investigators try to determine whether the wounded officer was hit by friendly fire from his partner.

After the rookie officer was wounded behind an apartment building and the other officer apparently stumbled and fell, the suspect, Arthur Porter - who authorities said was armed with a handgun - ran to the front of the building, where he was fatally shot by a third officer, the two videos show.

At a news conference Thursday, Assistant D.C. Police Chief Leslie Parsons said Porter, of Northwest Washington, fired at the rookie officer and his partner behind the building. He said authorities are still investigating whether Porter also shot at officers in front of the building moments later. The officer who fatally shot him in front of the building fired about nine rounds, one of the videos shows.

The videos do not clearly show Porter firing any shots behind or in front of the building. But the video of Porter being shot shows that as he collapsed, mortally wounded, a pistol fell from his hand or pocket.

Porter's father, Terry Mobley, said he watched the videos and did not see his son firing a gun.

"I don't hear him shooting, and I don't see him shooting," Mobley, 58, said Thursday. "Just because somebody is running and presumed to have a gun that you haven't seen, that is not a reason to be shot."

Mobley urged D.C. Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) to order the release of additional body-camera footage from other officers at the scene. Police on Thursday released videos only from the two officers who fired their weapons, as they are required to do by law. No body-camera videos were released from the wounded officer, who did not fire shots, police said.

The wounded officer, who has not been publicly identified, was hit once in "the back area," police said. They said he has been released from a hospital and is expected to make a full recovery.

A D.C. police official, speaking to reporters Thursday on the condition of anonymity because the investigation is ongoing, said Bowser "can make a determination of releasing any body-camera video that our department has" in instances of "great public interest." The mayor's office did not respond to a request for comment.

The officers who fired shots were identified as Dallas Bennett and Jonathan Hasstedt in a letter sent by Lindsey Appiah, the District's deputy mayor for public safety and justice, to D.C. Council member Brooke Pinto (D-Ward 2), chairwoman of the public safety and judiciary committee. The letter does not say which officer fired the shots that killed Porter.

Police said both officers have been placed on administrative leave pending the outcome of the investigation by police and the U.S. attorney's office in the District. Neither officer responded to a request for comment.

Public records show that Bennett has been an officer since 2018 and Hasstedt since January of this year. D.C. police awarded Bennett a "ribbon of valor" in 2021, a recognition given to officers who responded to the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol by mobs of supporters of President Donald Trump.

Last week's incident, in the 2800 block of Gainesville Street SE, began shortly before 5 p.m. when police responded to a 911 call about a person with a gun shouting at two people. Authorities said that when officers arrived, Porter was involved in an argument on the street that had "domestic overtones."

Body-camera footage shows one officer confronting Porter.

"Hey, sir," the officer said, as Porter walked away. Three times, the officer said, "Excuse me, sir," then, "Can you keep your hands up for me?"

Porter appeared to have his hands up but continued to walk away.

"Can you stop?" the officer said, before Porter began to run. Two officers chased him, one saying into his radio, "He's got a gun in his pocket." Moments later, behind the building, one police officer started firing toward a wide passageway beside that building and another. Police said Porter was firing from the passageway. Multiple gunshots can be heard on the video as the wounded officer, who had been running in front of the officer who was firing, collapsed.

A few seconds later, Porter emerged from between the two buildings and was confronted by additional officers. One of them fired at Porter roughly nine times, the video shows. Porter stumbled, a handgun falling to his side, and collapsed beside a tree.

He was pronounced dead at a hospital, police said.

Parsons said investigators are still trying to determine whether Porter fired at the officer who killed him in front of the building. The assistant police chief said the officer "saw [Porter] emerge and raise a handgun."

The body-camera footage released does not definitively show whether Porter raised his hand or fired the weapon. Police said they recovered Porter's semiautomatic pistol at the scene.

Mobley said he last saw his son the day before he was killed. The two visited Mobley's sister's house to help her decorate, and Porter gave advice about how to best hang curtains.

"We're a family," Mobley said. "We always do things together."

Mobley said Porter's 4-year-old son still does not understand what happened to his father. Porter's 11-year-old daughter, meanwhile, has largely refused to eat since she got the news. Mobley said he tells her, "We all miss your dad."