Metro
Local Digest

412 words
27 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

CORRECTION: In the Dec. 27 Metro section, a Local Digest item about a fatal shooting outside the L’Enfant Plaza Metro station incorrectly said that a second entrance, at Ninth and Seventh streets SW, remained open. Two separate entrances, one on Ninth Street SW and one on D Street SW, remained open.

THE DISTRICT

Man fatally shot in SW, outside L'Enfant Plaza

A man was found fatally shot early Tuesday outside the L'Enfant Plaza Metro station, just south of the National Mall in Southwest Washington, according to D.C. police.

Police said they were called about 4:30 a.m. to the 600 block of Maryland Avenue SW for a report of a shooting. A department spokeswoman said the victim was taken to a hospital, where he died.

The man's identity was not immediately made public.

Metro said on X that the station entrance at Seventh Street and Maryland Avenue SW was briefly closed during the police investigation. A second entrance, at Ninth and Seventh streets SW, remained open. The station serves the Orange, Silver, Blue, Yellow and Green lines.

The area is near several museums and federal buildings.

- Peter Hermann

MARYLAND

Police identify man killed in Pr. George's

Prince George's County police identified a man who was killed Sunday night.

The Christmas Eve shooting occurred about 11:20 p.m. in the 2900 block of Ritchie Road in the District Heights area, police said. Kevin Simmons, 53, of District Heights, was found with gunshot wounds inside a residence, police said. He was taken to a hospital, where he was pronounced dead.

Prince George's County police, on X, said that, "preliminarily, detectives do not believe this is a random crime." Investigators are working to determine a motive and identify a suspect, police said.

- Emily Davies and Jasmine Hilton

MARYLAND

Man fatally shot, woman wounded

A man was killed and a woman wounded in a shooting in Prince George's County early Tuesday, police said.

Officers responded about 12:50 a.m. to a report of a shooting in the 5100 block of Deal Drive in the Oxon Hill area. Inside an apartment building, they found a man with gunshot wounds, said Cpl. Unique Jones of Prince George's County police.

The man was pronounced dead at the scene. Police did not immediately release his identity.

A woman who was wounded was taken to a hospital in stable condition, police said.

- Jasmine Hilton