Metro
ANC rep could take on new job

Omari Daniels 
732 words
25 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Joel Castón made history in 2021, becoming the first incarcerated person to win elected office in D.C. Two years later, he could make history again by becoming the first formerly incarcerated person to serve on the D.C. Sentencing Commission.

Castón, who spent 27 years in prison for the killing of an 18-year-old man in a shooting in a D.C. parking lot in 1994, spoke at a hearing Wednesday for a potential appointment for the sentencing commission.

"I look forward to contributing to judicious sentencing guidance that promote justice, compassion and the betterment of all people in Washington, D.C.," Castón said in prepared remarks to the D.C. Council on Wednesday. "If confirmed, I would be a fierce advocate for sentences that balance accountability, public well-being and human dignity."

The resolution to appoint Castón to the sentencing commission was first presented to the council in October. Council Chairman Phil Mendelson (D) said at a second hearing Thursday that he hopes to present the consideration of Castón before the council Jan. 9.

While serving his sentence, Castón previously was the first incarcerated individual elected to public office in Washington when he won an advisory neighborhood commissioner seat in 2021 to represent the city's Hill East neighborhood. That area includes the D.C. jail on 19th Street SE where Castón was incarcerated. His overarching goal in that role, he said at the time, was to change the public narrative about incarcerated people.

Attempts to contact Castón were not immediately successful. A spokesman for the sentencing commission said that, if confirmed, Castón would be the first former inmate to serve on the commission.

Mendelson said Wednesday that the council established the commission to "review and analyze pertinent sentencing data, policies and practices in the District of Columbia, to submit an annual report to the council summarizing the commission's activities, and review and research sentencing practices locally and nationally, and to make recommendations to the council that increase the fairness and effectiveness of criminal sentencing policies and practices in the District of Columbia."

The commission works as an independent agency within D.C. government and also conducts focus groups and other activities to collect and disseminate information about sentencing guidelines. The sentencing commission's role will probably undergo more scrutiny as the District grapples with rising homicide numbers, and some public officials have called for harsher penalties for those convicted of violent offenses.

Mendelson praised Castón's civic involvement in a statement, saying he "is well regarded, a former publicly elected ANC commissioner and has demonstrated his commitment to the community as a returning citizen. Additionally, he studied criminal justice while incarcerated for more than 20 years. And the sentencing commission indicated they wanted a member who has experienced the criminal justice system."

When asked during the hearing by Mendelson how he would contribute to the commission, Castón said he would do so "in a fair and just manner." Castón said he applauded the council for "allowing him to be a part of something very important for all Washingtonians."

"As a native Washingtonian who has been directly impacted by the criminal legal system, I am humbled to take on the critical responsibility that this position entails," Castón said. "I take this duty incredibly seriously and will bring my diverse background and experiences to inform thoughtful, ethical decisions on complex sentencing issues facing our city. I step into this position keenly aware of that responsibility."

Castón also said the sentencing commission plays an integral role in determining sentencing policies that affect the lives of residents and shape the justice system. When asked by Mendelson whether he believes there are any issues with the guidelines, Castón said that he judiciously studied the sentencing guidelines and city's criminal code during his incarceration.

"One thing that I saw that jumps out to me is the disparity in sentencing within our guidelines, which I was more so very thankful that we're rewriting them to become more current," Castón said.

If appointed, Castón would serve a four-year term to end July 2, 2026, replacing Molly M. Gill, who served on the commission from October 2021 to June 2023.

"Thank you for welcoming me to this commission. I take this duty seriously and would pursue it earnestly for our city," Castón said.