Metro
Local Digest

637 words
12 February 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Man gets 120 years in 2019 triple murder

A District man was sentenced to 120 years in prison for the 2019 fatal shooting of three men whom prosecutors say he lured down a deserted Southeast Washington street, authorities said Friday.

D.C. Superior Court Judge J. Michael Ryan sentenced Rakeem Willis, 31, after a jury in November found him guilty of first-degree murder in the slayings of Sean Shuler, 26; Javon Abney, 26; and Tyrik Hagood, 24.

Prosecutors argued at trial that at around 10 p.m. on Jan. 26, 2019, Willis lured the three men down the 1500 block of Fort Davis Place SE, where gunmen shot them multiple times. Authorities said two of the men were found in a vehicle and the third was found yards away. Police found a handgun, drugs and ammunition inside the vehicle.

Authorities tied Willis to the murders via a stolen Lexus sedan that was later found on fire just across the Maryland state line off Interstate 295.

About five months after a public plea from Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) seeking information regarding the killings, Willis was arrested. He has been held in the D.C. jail.

Court records released after Willis's arrest revealed that Shuler had been scheduled to testify for prosecutors in a murder trial. A witness told police that the victims were trying to buy firearms but did not have enough money.

- Keith L. Alexander

Two men fatally shot in Southeast

Two men were fatally shot Friday in separate incidents a few blocks apart in the Anacostia area of Southeast Washington, according to D.C. police.

The first shooting occurred shortly before 3 a.m. in the 1700 block of Minnesota Avenue SE.

Police identified the victim as Thomas Goodman, 42, of Southeast Washington. Police said he died at a hospital. No other details were immediately made available.

In the second homicide, a man was shot around 6 p.m. in the 1900 block of 18th Street SE, said Officer Hugh Carew, a police spokesman.

Police on Saturday identified the victim as 27-year-old Melvin Henderson of Southeast. He died at the scene, police said.

The sites of the shootings are less than a half-mile apart. Officials said no other connections could be found between them.

- Peter Hermann, Martin Weil and Emily Davies

MARYLAND

Slaying discovered after car crash

A teenager was found fatally shot early Saturday after a car crash in Prince George's County, police said.

The male, whose name hasn't been released, was found around 12:40 a.m. at Parkwood Street and 72nd Avenue in the Landover Hills area, police said. Officers went there after a car crash was reported and found the victim in the vehicle suffering from a gunshot wound, police said.

He died at the scene, according to police.

- Martin Weil

VIRGINIA

Man charged in

December killing

A man was arrested and charged Friday in a fatal shooting last year in the Mount Vernon area of Fairfax County, officials said.

Malik Johnson, 22, was arrested in the Dec. 5 shooting of 26-year-old Jordan Summers in the 7900 block of Audubon Avenue, Fairfax County police wrote in a news release. Police said Johnson, of Alexandria, was charged with second-degree murder and felony use of a firearm.

A resident found Summers, of Lorton, that night on a sidewalk, police said at the time. Police said Summers had at least one gunshot wound to the upper body and died at the scene.

Johnson was connected to the case through surveillance video and forensic evidence, police said. Officials said he was arrested Friday and booked in the county jail, where he was held without bail.

Attorney information for Johnson was not immediately available in online court records.

- Olivia Diaz