Metro
Local DIGEST

541 words
17 January 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

1 dead, 5 hurt after car crashes into building

One person died and five others were injured Sunday night after a vehicle smashed into a building after a collision at a major intersection in the District, authorities said.

The crash occurred about 6:15 p.m. at 15th Street and Massachusetts Avenue NW, said Vito Maggiolo, a fire department spokesperson.

The crash into the building came after two cars collided, the fire department said. All six people taken to hospitals had been in a car, the department said. One of them, a man whose name was not released, died at a hospital later Sunday, D.C. police said Monday.

Three people were evaluated but not taken to hospitals, according to the fire department. It was not clear which of the injured were in which of the cars.

Maggiolo said no structural damage to the building was reported. The cause of the crash was not known.

- Martin Weil and Katie Shaver

MARYLAND

Man killed, 2 injured

in Montgomery crash

A man was killed and two people were injured in a collision Sunday morning in Montgomery County, police said.

The man, identified Monday as Eddy Thomas Jara, 30, of Gaithersburg, was driving west on Muncaster Mill Road in Rockville at 7:23 a.m. when his black Honda Civic crossed the center line, Montgomery police said. The Civic collided with a silver Ford Escape heading east on the same road, near Sycamore Lane. Jara died at the scene, police said. The driver and front passenger in the Ford Escape were taken to a hospital with injuries that were not life-threatening, police said.

- Katie Mettler and Katherine Shaver

Police investigate fatal shooting of driver

Prince George's County police are investigating the death of a Carroll County man found fatally shot in his SUV on Friday night after he delivered groceries in Temple Hills, police said Monday.

Sykesville resident Stephen Lee Green, 34, was found about 11:15 p.m. in the 2200 block of Afton Street, police said. Green had just delivered a grocery order to a home on Afton Street before he was fatally shot, police said.

- Katherine Shaver

VIRGINIA

Police search for car stolen with girl inside

Fairfax County police were searching Monday for a gray Honda Accord stolen Sunday evening from a Lincolnia parking lot with a 5-year-old girl in the back seat, police said.

The girl was found uninjured about 50 minutes later in Northwest Washington and was reunited with her family.

Police said a preliminary investigation found that the child's stepfather left her in the car and the car running in a parking lot in the 6200 block of Little River Turnpike about 6:30 p.m. while he went inside a restaurant to pick up food. When he came back outside, police said, the car and girl were gone.

As officers searched the area, D.C. police were called to 13th and E streets NW at 7:18 p.m., after two people had found the girl alone. Police are looking for the gray 2012 Honda with Maryland plates 94667CJ. It has a black hood and damage to the front and back ends, police said.

- Katherine Shaver