Metro
Hours after protective order, a D.C. woman dies

Peter Hermann 
1,442 words
9 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Patricia Johnson, it seems, did everything she could to separate from her boyfriend, who she accused of abusing her.

She repeatedly called D.C. police and sought help from the court system.

Despite those efforts, however, authorities said 46-year-old Desmond L. Thurston fatally shot Johnson, 52, on Oct. 1 in her home, hours after he was served with a court-issued temporary protective order barring him from being near Johnson or her property.

Johnson's death - she was shot in her head and chest inside her clapboard duplex at the far southern edge of the District - was another reminder of a domestic-violence prevention system overwhelmed with people desperately seeking help, and one that leaves them largely on their own to navigate police and court bureaucracies.

"We have a victim that had multiple prior domestic violence incidents, that had reached out for help and done all the things we ask victims to do," said Micaela Deming, policy director for the D.C. Coalition Against Domestic Violence. "And the city still couldn't keep her safe. And that, unfortunately, is not unusual."

On average, nearly 500 people per month file petitions for temporary protective orders in the District, according to a D.C. Superior Court spokesman.

Petitioners, almost always women, are given copies of the orders by court employees so they can attempt to serve the paperwork on their alleged abusers, typically by hiring a private process server. They can also request that D.C. police serve the documents, although advocates say that can sometimes take days.

Even when protective orders are served - as was done in Johnson's case - D.C. police caution on their tip sheets for abused women that paperwork alone cannot prevent someone from violating the order, and "cannot make the abuse stop."

Temporary protective orders are valid for two weeks, providing time to schedule a court hearing at which the accused can tell their side of the story. A judge then decides whether the order is extended.

Natalia Otero, co-founder and executive director of DC Safe, which assists victims of domestic violence, said authorities should assess cases less on whether a person who was abused followed proper court procedures and more on "the mind-set of the person doing the harm."

Otero, whose group does lethality assessments on domestic violence cases and consults with police on calls in real time, said the system should give more attention to extreme risk cases.

"We need to start doing better by survivors to coordinate resources and have these situations managed on a timely basis for survivors that are at a higher risk for homicides," she said.

Advocates say protective orders are important first steps in confronting abusers and holding them to account. Deming, of the D.C. Coalition Against Domestic Violence, called the orders "tremendously helpful" in lowering tensions and giving people breathing space to separate and regroup. But she noted that "protection orders aren't a single solution," but rather "a piece of a safety plan."

In the end, though, a temporary protective order couldn't stop Johnson from being killed. She "jumped through all the hoops" to get help, Deming said, and "the result was still her death."

Police said they arrested Thurston shortly after the killing when he approached officers about a mile from Johnson's home and surrendered. In an arrest affidavit filed in Superior Court, police said Thurston confessed to the killing, which he told detectives occurred after Johnson accused him of cheating on her.

The U.S. attorney's office in the District charged Thurston with second-degree murder. A Superior Court judge ordered him detained and scheduled a preliminary hearing for Oct. 16. Thurston's attorney, Steven R. Kiersh, declined to comment. A woman who identified herself as Thurston's sister, reached by phone Friday, said, "He is innocent, that is all I can say." She declined to comment further.

As of Friday, Johnson was among the latest of 217 homicide victims in D.C. so far this year, up 38 percent from the same time period in 2022.

Efforts to reach relatives of Johnson were unsuccessful. Court documents and D.C. police reports catalogue a long history of reported abuse, threats and other turmoil involving the couple. Before the killing, police had arrested Thurston on a domestic violence-related charge involving Johnson.

In January 2020, during an argument over shared property, police said, they charged Thurston with assault after Johnson accused him of punching her in the left eye. Police said Thurston alleged that Johnson had also struck him, but officers said they found no evidence of that and determined that Thurston was the primary aggressor.

Court documents show that prosecutors dropped the charge against Thurston shortly before a scheduled trial in May 2020. No explanation was given, and a spokeswoman for the U.S. attorney's office for D.C. said that as a matter of policy, the office does not comment on charging decisions.

In October 2021, D.C. police said they responded to a report of the couple loudly arguing - a dispute over gas for a vehicle, as it turned out. A police spokeswoman said officers found no probable cause for an arrest. Johnson, in the petition for a temporary protective order that she filed days before she was killed, said Thurston had threatened to shoot her in the face. But there is no mention of that allegation in a D.C. police report filed at the time of the incident.

Johnson also wrote in her protective order petition that Thurston had threatened her and destroyed her property during August and September 2022. D.C. police said they have no reports of calls regarding those allegations.

On Sept. 28, Johnson called police and told them her boyfriend threatened to kill her, according to a summary of her protective order that is included in the police affidavit used to obtain an arrest warrant for Thurston after Johnson was killed. A police report on that incident says only that she and Thurston had been arguing about one of them moving out of the home they shared. The report does not mention the threat Johnson alleges.

Officers wrote that they "did not have any probable cause to believe an assault took place," and that they advised Johnson to obtain a temporary protective order.

Protective orders are not public documents, so it could not be determined precisely what Johnson wrote in hers, or if she mentioned whether she or Thurston had access to a firearm.

On Sept. 30, police said Johnson called them for help serving the temporary protective order she had just obtained. But she only had an electronic version on her cellphone, and officers told her they needed a hard copy. Domestic violence advocates said the officers were correct - although they also said protective orders can now be filed electronically, and the guidelines about requiring hard copies are being reevaluated.

The affidavit filed in connection with Thurston's arrest says a friend helped Johnson get printed copies shortly after police left the residence. Later that night, police said, Thurston came to Johnson's house after learning about the protective order. He called police and told them he wanted them to stand by outside so he could move some of his belongings out of the house.

While he was there, a police report says, Johnson provided officers with the printed temporary protection order, which the officers promptly served on Thurston. Police said Thurston then left the home.

Seven hours later, in the pre-dawn hours of Oct. 1, police said Thurston returned to the home and used his key to get inside. Thurston later told police that during an argument, Johnson headed to a closet where, he claimed, she kept a firearm, according to the arrest affidavit. He told police that he reached the closet first, grabbed the gun and shot Johnson on a second-floor landing, the affidavit says.

Another person inside the home witnessed the shooting, the affidavit says. The unidentified witness told police that Thurston said "he messed up and that the decedent ruined his life," as a police officer summarized it in the affidavit. Thurston also told the other person "there won't be a him without her."

Police said they found the paperwork that Johnson had assembled before filing her petition for a temporary protective order. The materials were laid out on a bed, including Thurston's driver's license, his social security card and his birth certificate.

There also was a printout of the order itself - her copy to keep.