Metro
Carjackings prompt round of finger-pointing

Emily Davies                Keith L. Alexander 
482 words
3 November 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B04
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

After D.C. Mayor Muriel E. Bowser this week made inaccurate statements about a 15-year-old carjacking suspect, erroneously telling reporters that the girl had six or seven previous arrests for carjacking, Bowser's office has declined to publicly correct the record, saying it is barred from doing so by confidentiality laws.

Even though Bowser (D), at a Monday news conference, offered an account of the girl's background that turned out to be false, based on court records, the mayor's top public-safety official, Lindsey Appiah, said Wednesday, "I don't have anything additional to say about which charge, or whose charges, are attached to whom, because ... we can't."

The girl was arrested Oct. 26 after she and other young people allegedly carjacked two vehicles. One of the vehicles crashed in Northeast Washington, killing its 16-year-old driver. The 15-year-old was a passenger in the other vehicle, police said.

Discussing the incident at the news conference, Bowser erroneously said the girl's arrest was her "sixth or seventh" for carjackings, and she faulted a judge for not confining the girl to a youth detention center in those purported cases. But court documents reviewed by The Post show the girl was previously charged with robberies, not carjackings.

The girl's arrest in the carjacking that ended in the death of Kendra Outlaw, 16, of Northeast Washington - as well as an unrelated incident in which a 13-year-old boy was fatally shot while allegedly committing a carjacking - prompted finger-pointing among public officials in the District.

On Monday, Bowser, after her erroneous account of the 15-year-old's record, said a judge should have ordered the girl held in a secure facility instead of allowing her to await prosecution at home. According to the documents reviewed by The Post, the girl faced 12 previous charges of robbery as well as charges of weapons possession, destruction of property and receiving stolen property.

D.C. Superior Court Judge Hertzfeld released the teen a week before the Oct. 26 carjacking incident, after she said the city's Department of Youth Rehabilitation Services had no available shelter beds for her in a nonsecure setting, court records show. City officials have acknowledged a shortage in shelter beds for girls but said the agency had room to securely hold her.

The court spokesman, Doug Buchanan, said that Hertzfeld could not have ordered the teen securely detained, because the D.C. attorney general's office did not ask the judge to impose that level of confinement.

The attorney general's office declined to comment, saying in a statement that it "is not at liberty to discuss the specifics of a juvenile's case, even when others make public statements about the case that we know to be inaccurate."