Metro
Local Digest

602 words
13 August 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE REGION

Stolen ambulance chase ends in D.C.

A man driving a truck crashed into vehicles on I-395 near the 14th Street Bridge in Virginia on Saturday, then stole an ambulance and led police on a pursuit into the District, striking 10 vehicles before being stopped in Southwest Washington, according to police.

Several people were reported injured, but none seriously, according to Virginia State Police, which is leading the investigation. The multiple crash scenes closed major roads between Crystal City in Virginia and the Southwest Waterfront in D.C. Backups were reported into Saturday evening on I-395 and George Washington Memorial Parkway.

Corinne Geller, a spokeswoman for Virginia State Police, said the incident began about 3:40 p.m. in the northbound lanes of I-395 at Exit 10, near Boundary Channel Drive on the approach to the bridge spanning the Potomac River.

Dave Statter, a former WUSA-9 reporter and current blogger, posted video of a truck plowing through what appeared to be slow-moving vehicles in heavy traffic, before careening into a concrete barrier and becoming disabled.

Geller said the man who was driving the truck commandeered an ambulance from the Arlington County Fire Department that had been dispatched to the crash site to treat the injured.

Geller said state police troopers pursued the ambulance into the District. She said the ambulance struck 10 vehicles along the way. A D.C. police spokesman said the pursuit ended at 14th and D streets in Southwest Washington, on the other side of the bridge about 1½ miles from the initial crash site in Virginia.

A D.C. police spokesman said the driver of the ambulance was taken into custody. It was not immediately clear whether there were any injuries where the pursuit ended in the District. The driver's name and possible criminal charges were not immediately available.

-Peter Hermann

MARYLAND

Man killed in Clinton area of Pr. George's

A man was found fatally shot early Saturday in the Clinton area of Prince George's County according to police.

Few details were immediately divulged about the incident. Police said it occurred about 2:30 a.m. in the 9800 block of Piscataway Road.

The area appears rural, with a roadside restaurant, some private homes and a small strip of stores. Police said the victim - identified only as male - was pronounced dead at the scene.

Police did not say whether the shooting occurred in a building or outdoors, but authorities did say that "detectives don't believe this is a random crime." No arrest had been made.

-Peter Hermann

VIRGINIA

Prince William homicide victim ID'd

Prince William County police identified the 33-year-old man killed Aug. 5 in Woodbridge.

Jesser Edwardo Marroquin Cordon of Brentwood, Md., was stabbed after an altercation outside a home, police said.

Officers responded to the incident just before 10:30 p.m. in the 800 block of Fulton Place, which police initially reported as Fulton Road. Police said Heriberto Valdez, a 24-year-old Woodbridge resident, reportedly stabbed Marroquin Cordon after a confrontation had escalated.

Police said Valdez later chased Marroquin Cordon to the backyard, where he collapsed. Valdez remained at the home and was detained by police without incident, police said.

Cordon was pronounced dead at the scene, police said. They said Valdez and Marroquin Cordon were acquaintances.

Valdez has since been charged with murder and use of a weapon in commission of a felony. Efforts Friday afternoon to reach an attorney listed in online court records for Valdez were unsuccessful.

-Heidi Perez-Moreno

and Jasmine Hilton