Metro
One critically wounded after U.S. Marshals task force opens fire

Salvador Rizzo                Olivia Diaz 
710 words
9 August 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Members of a U.S. Marshals task force opened fire at a vehicle in the parking lot of the Potomac Yard Shopping Center in Alexandria on Tuesday afternoon in an encounter that critically wounded one man, according to law enforcement officials, a witness and the man's father.

The Marshals Service said its Capital Area Regional Fugitive Task Force was "involved in a shooting incident" just before 1 p.m. while attempting to arrest a person who was wanted by the Talbot County, Md., sheriff's office on attempted murder, assault and firearms charges.

The statement did not say who fired or why but added that "no law enforcement officers were injured." Asked to clarify whether U.S. marshals had fired shots, Barry Lane, a spokesman for the agency, said, "We'll have to characterize this as a shooting incident until the investigation is complete." The wanted man was shot, authorities said.

Authorities did not formally identify the wounded man, but the description they provided of him and his charges appeared to match that of Stewart Orlando Ray, who was wanted in connection with a shooting on Sunday in Talbot County. Larry Smith, Ray's father, told The Washington Post in a brief telephone interview that authorities in Virginia had told him that U.S. marshals had shot his son in the shopping center parking lot and that his son was in critical condition.

Roger Lowery, a manager at the Men's Wearhouse in the shopping center, said he watched as people he described as "agents" got in front and back of a vehicle in the parking lot, attempting to persuade a person inside to step outside. The law enforcement officers, he said, told the person to get out four or five times.

"They asked the person numerous times to step out of the vehicle, and that person did not," Lowery said. The encounter, he said, lasted 10 or 15 minutes.

Lowery said he watched from inside his store as the officers opened fire. Because they were on both sides of the vehicle, he said, he feared a possible "crossfire situation." Lowery said he heard about 10 shots.

Video of the encounter obtained by Fox 5 shows some law enforcement officers in tactical vests on either side of a white vehicle that backs up toward them and then pulls forward. On one side, those in law enforcement appear to take cover behind the open door of a vehicle. On the other, one law enforcement officer with a shield stands in front of an officer with a long gun. The affiliation of the officers - whether they are deputy U.S. marshals or others assigned to the task force - is not immediately clear.

The officers soon open fire - though the view of the vehicle at which they are shooting is obscured.

Smith, Ray's father, said he was frustrated that officers had shot his son, questioning why they needed to do so after surrounding the vehicle and why they fired so many times. He said Ray works as an electrician and has three children.

Lowery said the angle from which he was viewing the encounter did not allow him to see who law enforcement officers ultimately pulled from the vehicle.

The Marshals Service statement did not describe what precipitated the shooting. It said the incident was being investigated by Alexandria police. A spokesman for that agency said the wounded man's injuries were believed to be life-threatening.

Capt. John Bollinger of the Talbot County sheriff's office said that his agency had been looking for Ray in connection with the Sunday shooting but that he had not yet received confirmation that Ray was wounded in the encounter with the Marshals task force. According to a news release from the sheriff's office, Ray allegedly shot and wounded someone in an incident on Tunis Mills Road and Unionville Road before fleeing.

A Toyota in the shopping center parking lot on Tuesday had its rear window shattered, and there appeared to be bullet holes in a white pickup at its rear. The glass door of an AT&T Store also was shattered.

Alice Crites contributed to this report.