Metro
Local Digest

378 words
26 August 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Police: NW shooting victim was Va. man

D.C. police identified the victim of a Thursday fatal shooting in Northwest as a 27-year-old Virginia man.

The shooting occurred about 4:35 a.m. in the 3600 block of 16th Street NW, near the Mount Pleasant and Columbia Heights neighborhoods, according to D.C. police.

Police identified the victim as Larry Thomas, 27, of Triangle, Va. Authorities said no arrest was made, and no other details were immediately available.

- Peter Hermann

3 arrested in climate protest at museum

Three people said they were arrested Thursday during a protest inside the National Museum of Natural History in an effort to raise awareness about the climate crisis and to urge President Biden to declare a climate emergency.

Jim Wood, a spokesman for the museum, confirmed in a statement that three people were arrested about 11:30 a.m. Thursday in the fossil hall after one person glued themself to a sign and others climbed into an exhibit. They were accused of unlawful entry. Wood did not confirm the names of those arrested or what exactly authorities would charge them with.

The hall was closed for about 30 minutes, and there was no damage, Wood said.

The three protesters said that they were part of Declare Emergency, an activist group seeking governmental action on climate change, and that they were arrested for alleged unlawful entry in Thursday's action. The group also organized the April protest that included smearing paint on the case protecting Edgar Degas's "Little Dancer Aged Fourteen" sculpture at the National Gallery of Art. The group has held demonstrations in the region that resulted in protesters being arrested for blocking traffic.

The protesters' action happened in the David H. Koch Hall of Fossils - Deep Time, in a section of the exhibit labeled "Last American Dinosaurs," Wood said. The protesters said they chose the location to make the point that humans are the dinosaurs of today, in that humanity faces the "asteroid" of carbon, said Callie Justice, 72, of Durham, N.C., who was one of the people arrested.

The purpose of the action was to spread this message - not to damage anything inside the museum, the protesters said.

- Ellie Silverman