Metro
Four men sentenced for 10-year-old's killing

Keith L. Alexander 
617 words
21 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Four D.C. men were sentenced Friday to prison sentences ranging from 35 to 65 years for the 2018 shooting of 10-year-old Makiyah Wilson, who was hit by a stray bullet in the courtyard of a Northeast Washington apartment building.

At a trial during the summer, federal prosecutors in D.C. Superior Court argued that the four men were members of a neighborhood gang from the Wellington Park area of Southeast. They stole a car and assembled an arsenal of weapons as part of a plot to target people associated with the Clay Terrace neighborhood, prosecutors said.

The four are among six people convicted of first-degree murder in Makiyah's death.

The shooting occurred July 16, 2018, when a group of masked men jumped out the stolen Infiniti and, within 20 seconds, fired 50 bullets indiscriminately into the courtyard of an apartment complex in the 300 block of 53rd Street NE. Makiyah was killed when a bullet entered her back and exited her chest. Four other victims, including her sister, were also shot.

Authorities arrested 11 people in connection with the shooting. This summer, six of those charged were found guilty of various crimes including first-degree murder, conspiracy and other crimes.

Four of six co-defendants were sentenced Friday. Dozens of the defendants' relatives and friends were seated on one side of the courtroom while Makiyah's family, including her parents, were on the other side.

Judge Robert Okun gave the toughest sentences to two men who prosecutors argued were among the shooters who jumped out of the car and opened fire.

Qujuan Thomas, 24, was sentenced to 68 years. Assistant U.S. Attorney Laura Bach said that in 2017, Thomas was found guilty of robbery and was allowed to be sentenced under the city's Youth Rehabilitation Act, meaning the record of the conviction would be sealed if he successfully completed his probation. But Bach told the judge that while Thomas was on probation, he planned and carried out the fatal shooting.

Thomas smiled as the judge imposed the sentence. Several of his family members, while leaving the courtroom, yelled, "I love you," and Thomas shouted back, "I love you too."

Okun said he was sentencing Gregory Taylor, 27, outside of the recommended guidelines, and imposed a 65-year term. Prosecutors say Taylor was one of the shooters and bankrolled the purchase of the firearms that were used. Bach said Taylor considered "everyone in Clay Terrace his enemy. Men, women and children." Makiyah's family burst into applause when the judge issued Taylor's sentence.

The judge sentenced 25-year-old Quentin Michals to 40 years. Okun said Michals "played a critical role in the conspiracy leading up to the murder." Defense attorneys pointed out that Michals was not present at the shooting. But prosecutors said Michals helped plan the attack and arranged for the stolen vehicle that was used. Michals also smiled broadly as his sentence was handed down.

The last of the four, Darrise Jeffers, 23, was sentenced to 35 years. Prosecutors said Jeffers provided the assault weapons that were used.

Earlier this month, the two co-defendants from this summer's trial - Isaiah Murchison, 24 and Marquell Cobbs, 21 - were sentenced earlier this month to 60 years and six years. Cobbs was the sole defendant found not guilty of the murder charges.

Outside the courtroom, Makiyah's mother, Donnetta Wilson, said she was "overjoyed" by the sentences. "It brings some closure to my family, but the sentences won't bring my daughter back."

Three additional co-defendants are scheduled to go to trial next year.