Metro
Six dead in Saturday shootings in District

Justin Wm. Moyer                Mary Claire Molloy 
1,080 words
6 August 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C05
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Six people were slain Saturday in the District, the first three of them in two shootings early in the day in Northwest Washington neighborhoods typically known for their vibrant nightlife.

Hours later, on Saturday night, three more people - two men and a woman - were killed in an outbreak of gunfire in the Anacostia area of Southeast Washington, police said. Two other people were wounded there. The Anacostia shooting occurred about 8 p.m. near 16th Street and Good Hope Road SE.

The killings come amid a barrage of homicides that have left at least a dozen people dead in the first five days of August. The city has now recorded more than 150 homicides so far this year, putting it on track for the largest number of killings in more than two decades and raising concerns about what is happening in the District this summer.

As the homicide tally continues to rise, officials are debating what can and should be done to mitigate violence as residents tired of daily killings demand a solution.

The early-morning shootings happened in Adams Morgan and the U Street corridor.

The first occurred about two blocks from Adams Morgan's bustling 18th Street. Around 1 a.m., officers went to the 2500 block of Ontario Road NW in response to reports of gunshots, D.C. acting police chief Pamela A. Smith, who was hired just weeks ago, said in a video statement.

The officers found three men with gunshot wounds, Smith said, and two were pronounced dead at the scene. The third was taken to a hospital with life-threatening injuries, Smith said. "Another act of senseless violence has occurred in this area," she said.

No further information about the shooting was immediately available, and the names of those who were shot were not released.

In Saturday's second outbreak of gunfire, a man was hospitalized after being shot at 12th and U streets NW around 3:30 a.m., according to police spokesperson Makhetha Watson. Officers in the area heard the sound of gunshots and found the victim, who was transported to a hospital, Watson said.

Hours later, another man was shot steps away in the 1200 block of U Street, Watson said. Officers found a man dead at the scene around 5:05 a.m. The victim's name was not released. At a bus stop in front of an entrance to the U Street Metro station, a Metro employee brushed shards of glass off the sidewalk with a broom. The crime scene was cordoned off by yellow police tape.

"I got off the train and didn't even pay attention to the crime tape because it's like city decoration to me," said Anika Bradford, 49, who sat outside eating at Ben's Next Door restaurant down the block. Bradford said gun violence is commonplace in her Southeast neighborhood and that, in 2021, she lost her 28-year-old cousin in a shooting.

"It's sad," she said. "I'm immune to death at this point."

Ben's Chili Bowl shuttered its doors for several hours as police investigated the scene into the early afternoon. The U Street shooting came little more than 24 hours after another homicide about a block away.

Around 1:30 a.m. Friday, Denzel Greenwood, 33, of Southeast was found dead near the U Street Metro station, according to D.C. police. He had been shot, police said.

In a statement, D.C. Council member Brianne K. Nadeau (D-Ward 1) said the shootings are "upsetting and devastating to our community." Nadeau said the locations of the recent shootings have "multiple known issues," according to the statement. She asked Smith, the acting police chief, to direct resources to hot spots where violence was breaking out.

She also called on the U.S. attorney's office for D.C. to prosecute more cases. "We have tools in our toolbox that are not being fully utilized and I continue to push for them to be used to their fullest," Nadeau's statement said.

"The level of gun violence in the District is unacceptable, and our Office has no greater priority than addressing this violence," U.S. Attorney Matthew M. Graves said in an emailed statement. "Our office continues to prosecute violent crime as aggressively as we ever have, charging over 90% of our most violent felonies and routinely continuing to investigate the small percentage we are not immediately able to charge. We all need to continue the conversation about how current laws can be further strengthened. And we need to ensure MPD has the resources it needs."

In an email, Jamie Sycamore, an advisory neighborhood commissioner for the U Street area, said that elected officials "have chosen to ignore or enable crime and violence by supporting policies and legislation that weakens our Mayor and the Law Enforcement agencies from doing their job."

The shootings are the latest in a wave of violence in the District this month. At least a dozen people have been shot in the first five days of August.

In a separate shooting Friday, a man was killed around 6:05 p.m. in the 900 block of Division Avenue NE, not far from the Maryland state line.

The victim was identified as 31-year-old Vincent Harvey of Temple Hills, Md.

Although many cities experienced a spike in crime during the pandemic, the current outbreak of violence in the District is not the norm. Violent crime in other cities, including Baltimore, Philadelphia, New York and Chicago, has fallen, according to statistics posted on those cities' police department websites.

Smith has alluded to an anti-crime plan that she is developing, but the plan has not yet appeared.

Peter Wood, chair of an Advisory Neighborhood Commission representing Adams Morgan, said in a telephone interview that constituents are "on edge." In the short term, there are questions about D.C.'s ability to recruit and retain police officers, Wood said, but there also is a need to eradicate the poverty that contributes to crime.

Addressing that problem will take a lifetime, Wood said. This barrage of troubles has led to a "defeatist attitude" that is difficult to overcome, he said. "Everyone knows something needs to be done," he said. "Figuring out what needs to be … is going to be hard."

Peter Hermann, Martin Weil and Clarence Williams contributed to this report.