Metro
After chase and crash, passersby assist with arrest in Old Town

Rachel Weiner 
432 words
2 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Police say two passersby in Alexandria helped detain the driver of a stolen car Saturday after a chase that started with a state trooper nearly getting run over and ended after the trooper maneuvered his vehicle to intentionally hit the stolen car to bring it to a stop.

Two men from D.C. - Ricardo Harris, 34, and Antonio Smith, 30 - were arrested and charged with possession of stolen property, wearing a mask while committing a felony, possession of burglary tools and obstruction of justice, police said. Harris, the alleged driver, is also charged with attempted malicious wounding of a law enforcement officer, engaging in a hit and run, and driving without an operator's license.

About 11 a.m. Saturday, according to police, a Virginia state trooper saw a stolen silver Kia Optima parked on Franklin Street in Old Town. After confirming the license plate matched the missing D.C. car, the trooper approached and told the driver, later identified as Harris, and passenger, Smith, to get out.

Police say the driver instead drove directly toward the trooper, who jumped out of the way to avoid getting hit, and proceeded to ram the trooper's car and run over a stop sign while turning onto South Washington Street.

The trooper went back to his car and pursued the Kia and then managed to stop the vehicle with use of a "PIT maneuver," state police spokeswoman Corinne Geller said. Short for "precision immobilization technique," a PIT maneuver involves intentionally using a police car to hit a fleeing car near the back corner, causing it to spin to a stop.

The driver and passenger ran from the car; the trooper caught up to Smith and arrested him. Geller said two people who witnessed the chase ran after Harris, caught up with him two blocks later and held him until an Alexandria police officer arrived.

Many law enforcement agencies do not teach the PIT maneuver because of the risk of causing a catastrophic crash. PIT maneuvers were implicated in at least 30 deaths and hundreds of accidents between 2016 and 2020.

In this case, Geller said, neither vehicle was moving at a high speed because of traffic, and the trooper used his car to pin the Kia up against a curb without causing a spin. Both Harris and Smith were taken to a hospital for medical evaluation and released the same day to police custody, Geller said. Neither the trooper nor a police dog in his vehicle was injured.