Metro
Police arrest teen in fatal shooting of 14-year-old in Columbia Heights

Emily Davies                Peter Hermann 
561 words
14 November 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B04
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A teenager, as his mother stood nearby, fatally shot a 14-year-old youth in the District's Columbia Heights neighborhood earlier this month, then he bragged about the killing three days later on social media, according to an arrest warrant filed by police in D.C. Superior Court.

The details of the Nov. 3 shooting of Niko Estep were made public after police arrested 17-year-old Lorenzo Thompson last week and charged him as an adult with second-degree murder while armed.

Another teenager was wounded in the shooting, which occurred about 11:35 p.m. near Fairmont and 14th streets NW, but police said it appeared that Niko was targeted as he and others rode by a gas station on scooters. Efforts to reach Niko's relatives have not been successful.

"Got him," police quoted Thompson saying on Instagram Live, according to the warrant. Authorities said he referred to the killing of "Y.B.," Niko's nickname.

Police said Niko was struck once in the back.

"The defendant shows no remorse during this broadcast and it appears that [he] is celebrating with others as he demonstrates someone turning around to run and then falling after being shot," police wrote in the warrant.

A D.C. Superior Court judge on Friday ordered Thompson detained and set a hearing for Nov. 16.

His attorney listed in court records did not respond to a request for comment. Court documents also provided an alternative spelling to Thompson's first name as Lorinzo.

D.C. is grappling with what top public safety officials have called a crime crisis among youth: An increasing number of children and teens are being killed, and an increasing number are being arrested for violent offenses such as carjacking.

Police do not describe a possible motive in the shooting. They said that Thompson used to live in the LeDroit Park area of Northwest Washington and that his mother lives a block from where the shooting occurred in Columbia Heights.

Surveillance video shows a man police identified as Thompson at a gas station convenience store. At one point, police said he reaches under his jacket and is then captured on video holding a gun in front of him with both hands, pointing in the direction of people on scooters.

Police said he fired up to 12 9mm rounds in seven seconds, striking Niko and another person on the scooters. Police said in the warrant that a woman with red braids and a white coat was standing behind the shooter. He then ran toward University Place, according to the warrant, and the woman with the red braids got on a scooter and rode "in the same direction as the suspect."

The warrant says a police detective reviewing still photos from surveillance video identified Thompson and his mother, who is the woman with the red braids.

Police said video shows Thompson entering an apartment near the shooting scene at 11:39 p.m., and the woman with red braids entering through the same apartment door eight minutes later.

Police said they searched the apartment and found a 9mm gun magazine in a backpack in Thompson's bedroom. They have not found the firearm.

Efforts to reach Thompson's mother were not successful.