Metro
Cruz accuses MWAA of plan to 'extort' fees over any new flights at National

Ian Duncan                Lori Aratani 
604 words
20 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Sen. Ted Cruz (Tex.), the top Republican on the committee that oversees aviation, said late Monday that the agency that runs the Washington area's two major airports is planning to "extort" millions of dollars in fees from airlines if lawmakers agree to allow more long-distance flights to Reagan National Airport.

Lawmakers are considering approving more flights into the tightly controlled airport, an idea backed by Delta Air Lines. The Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority opposes the idea, saying it could compromise safety and upset the balance between National and Dulles International Airport, where United Airlines is the biggest carrier.

A summary of proposed changes to an MWAA lease agreement reviewed by The Washington Post describes a $1 million annual fee for any airline that chooses to use any newly created slots at National. The money could be invested at Dulles, according to the document.

"It appears that United Airlines and MWAA are conspiring to undermine a possible congressional change to the rules even before they have been signed into law," Cruz wrote to Jack Potter, MWAA's chief executive.

Cruz, whose home state has long sought more access to National, asked the authority to promise not to impose a new fee. He also demanded records of the authority's communications with United and a coalition created to campaign against new flights at National.

MWAA said it had received the letter and "will respond appropriately." United declined to comment.

The question of whether to add more flights at National has been the subject of intense lobbying this year as Congress considers a sweeping bill to set the direction of the Federal Aviation Administration for the next five years. Cruz and Sen. Maria Cantwell (D-Wash.) made a deal in June to add four flights, people familiar with the agreement said at the time. The House passed a version of the FAA bill that did not make changes at National.

Delta and its allies have called for adding as many as 28 flights at National each day, saying they would provide travelers from more parts of the country the option of using the airport and gaining convenient access to the nation's capital. The Coalition to Protect America's Regional Airports, a new group backed by United, argues that the change would result in flights from smaller communities being cut.

Cruz wrote to Potter that while United was free to advocate for its position, MWAA was empowered by Congress to serve the interests of both airports.

"MWAA is not United Airlines' corporate lobbyist, nor should it be," Cruz wrote.

The dueling coalitions have marshaled arguments and counterarguments since the idea to add flights was pitched in April. Supporters say that it would reduce airfares and that Dulles no longer needs to be protected by restrictions at its older, sister airport. But opponents say National already is at capacity, pointing to an FAA analysis that concluded that more flights would mean more delays.

The last use-and-lease agreement between the airports authority and United Airlines was signed in 2016 and is set to expire next year. As part of the deal, the Virginia General Assembly agreed to contribute $50 million to ensure that United maintained a hub at Dulles. United, along with all carriers at Dulles, approved the deal.

The agreement also enabled MWAA to share revenue between the two airports. At the time, Dulles had been struggling and the additional funding from the state enabled MWAA to reduce costs for airlines that operated at Dulles.