Metro
Local Digest

511 words
6 September 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Police: Five shot, one fatally, in Southwest

Five men were shot, one fatally, on Tuesday afternoon near the waterfront in Southwest Washington, according to a D.C. police spokesman.

At least some of the victims were shot inside a building, the spokesman said. The shooting occurred about 4:15 p.m. in the 200 block of M Street SW, between the Waterfront Metro station and Nationals Park.

Authorities said three men went to a hospital on their own and another man was transported by emergency responders. Police said a sixth person was taken to a hospital with injuries but did not suffer a gunshot wound.

The killing followed a deadly Labor Day weekend. Seven people, including a 15-year-old boy, were shot and killed in the city between Friday and Monday.

As of Tuesday, homicides in the District were up 29 percent compared with the same time last year, police statistics show.

- Peter Hermann

MARYLAND

1 dead and 2 injured in Montgomery shooting

One person was killed and two others were injured Monday night in a domestic-related shooting in the Layhill and Aspen Hill area of Montgomery County, police said. The conditions of the wounded could not be learned.

Police said they found two female shooting victims, one dead and one wounded, inside a house in the 14200 block of Punch Street, a winding cul-de-sac off Layhill Road.

Police said a man was found shot and wounded on the street outside. The street is lined with single-family homes, many with attached two-car garages.

None of the people shot were named. A police spokeswoman said those wounded had been taken to a hospital.

Police said a man was taken into custody. No name was given. Police did not say whether anyone had been charged.

- Peter Hermann

Prince George's police officer is suspended

Prince George's County police suspended an officer Tuesday after a viral video showed him in uniform entering the back seat of a marked cruiser with a woman, the department said.

The officer has been identified as Francesco Marlett, according to the department.

The department said in a tweet that it launched an investigation into the circumstances of a "video circulating on social media with one of our officers" after becoming aware of the video Tuesday.

In the 46-second clip that has garnered more than 2 million views on TikTok, a uniformed county police officer appears to be bending down to hug and kiss a woman outside of a police cruiser at a park during the daytime. With his arm around her shoulder, the two then open the door and enter the back seat together. The video, filmed at a distance with children running past the camera, ends once they are inside.

Police did not release any additional information about the incident, including where and when it occurred.

Angelo Consoli, the Prince George's County police union president, said that the union is aware of the video.

Marlett could not be reached for comment.

- Jasmine Hilton