Metro
Despite his critical injuries, man shot by police is expected to survive

Emily Davies 
358 words
19 August 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Authorities on Friday identified the man shot by D.C. police this week as Javier Reyes-Lopez, 34, of Northwest Washington and said he was expected to survive despite suffering critical injuries.

A police officer shot Reyes-Lopez on Thursday after authorities allege he fired shots while officers gave verbal commands in Spanish and English. Police said Reyes-Lopez was arrested and charged with a host of crimes, including assault on a police officer, assault with a gun in a domestic violence incident and possession with intent to distribute cocaine.

The incident occurred in the 7400 block of Georgia Avenue NW. Police said officers first went to the area about 10 a.m., after receiving a report that a man had a gun in an apartment and was involved in a domestic violence incident.

In charging documents, authorities said Reyes-Lopez accused a woman of cheating, brandished a handgun and threatened to kill her and her children. Authorities allege he fired a shot at her as she ran down the stairs of the apartment but missed.

At the time of the call, officers were unable to find the people involved, police said. They were dispatched to the area again about half an hour later for the sounds of gunshots.

On the scene, another person who had been in the apartment with the woman flagged down officers and gave a description of the suspected shooter. He said the man had shot at him, according to charging documents.

Police said they located Reyes-Lopez and gave him the verbal commands. Reyes-Lopez, they said, "brandished a firearm and fired shots."

Acting D.C. police chief Pamela A. Smith said at a news conference Thursday that officers were still investigating whether those shots were directed at officers. But in charging documents, police alleged that a witness saw Reyes-Lopez "firing at the approaching officers."

Police initially said an officer shot at Reyes-Lopez once, striking him. But in charging documents, police said that Reyes-Lopez sustained multiple gunshot wounds and that multiple officers returned fire.