Metro
Teen, 15, sentenced in shooting of Commanders player, separate killing

Keith L. Alexander 
819 words
9 March 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B04
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

One of the teens who pleaded guilty in the shooting of Commanders running back Brian Robinson Jr. last year was ordered to remain in the custody of the city's Department of Youth Rehabilitation Services until he turns 21 years old.

The youth, 15, had pleaded guilty this year to attempted robbery in the Aug. 28 incident. But his penalty, imposed by a D.C. Superior Court judge Wednesday, stemmed not just from that shooting. He also pleaded guilty to voluntary manslaughter in the October killing of 15-year-old Andre Robertson, and to possession of a firearm, which authorities found in his possession when he was arrested in November.

Robinson, who did not attend the hearing, was shot as he left a business in the 1000 block of H Street NE. Authorities have said previously that the 15-year-old and another teen, who is now 17 and also pleaded guilty in the case, tried to take the running back's wallet and the keys to his Dodge Challenger Hellcat, and Robinson ran away.

The other teen chased him, and Robinson wrestled a gun from the youth's hands, authorities have said. The 15-year-old then fired at Robinson, authorities have said. One of the bullets hit Robinson just above his knee and another struck his hip area, missing major ligaments and bone.

The team declined to comment on the sentence.

Andre was killed in October, as he sat on the porch of a family member's home in the 500 block of 48th Place NE. About 30 of his family and friends tried to attend the hearing Wednesday, though Judge Robert A. Salerno allowed only immediate family members in the courtroom.

The hearing was an emotional affair, as Andre's relatives decried violence in the city, and prosecutors played a video showing photos of him from infancy through his teenage years.

Mary Satterfield, Andre's 92-year-old great-great-grandmother, was shot in her right foot in the same incident as she and Andre were preparing to go to a nearby store.

"We want to protect our children in our neighborhood. And you, you're a child too. I'm very sad. This hurts. He was just a baby," she said, addressing the 15-year-old.

Renee Brown, Andre's great-grandmother, said authorities told the family the teen targeted Andre because of a social media post. "The city is busy working on changing the criminal code, but what they need to do is hold the parents of children involved in violent crimes accountable as well," she said, referring to an overhaul of the city's criminal code that was then on the verge of being spiked by federal lawmakers.

The teen's public defenders asked the judge to sentence the 15-year-old to two years in the custody of youth services. Rachel Goodman said her client was "deeply sorry" and did not "intend for anyone to die that day." She said her client had witnessed an uncle get killed, and he never received the emotional or psychological help that he needed.

"He is committed to doing the work and never being in this seat again," Goodman said.

Prosecutor Jeanine Howard told the judge there were about a half dozen other people on the Northeast Washington porch when Andre was shot and killed. Howard said the youth had been charged in at least two previous criminal cases, including one in Maryland. She did not elaborate on the other cases.

The youth's attorney said she had asked her client not to speak at the hearing. She said he had written a formal apology letter to the court that she wanted to be shared with the victim's families. The Washington Post generally does not name juveniles charged with crimes, and was allowed to attend the hearing on the condition the youth's name not be published.

Salerno, who has overseen a string of juvenile criminal cases in the courthouse in recent months, sounded weary as he imposed the sentence. "We are here for yet another shooting involving a juvenile. That is happening far too often in the District of Columbia," he said.

Salerno told the youth - who was 14 at the time of the crimes - that he "showed himself to be a danger to the community." The youth's father, who sat in the audience, stood up and walked out of the courtroom.

After the hearing, Tyeisha Lucas, Andre's mother, who was also on the porch during the shooting, said she believed the youth should receive an adult sentence, equivalent to life in prison.

"This is what is happening in our city. Young people are committing crimes with guns, murders, knowing they will only get a slap on the wrist," Lucas said.

Nicki Jhabvala contributed to this report.