Metro
Local Digest

364 words
19 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Guard fires gun during shoplifting incident

An armed security guard fired a shot Sunday evening after four shoplifters took merchandise from a Chanel store in downtown Washington, police said.

Second District Cmdr. Tatjana Savoy said officers responded to 955 I St. NW at 5:32 p.m. for a report of gunshots and discovered that a group of people had entered the store, one of whom was carrying a fire extinguisher.

As the suspects fled, an armed security guard employed by the Chanel store fired one round, Savoy said. Savoy said that no one was hit and that there was no property damage to the store. Savoy said police do not know what the bullet hit.

Some guards are licensed to carry guns. Savoy declined to say whether the guard should have used the firearm.

Savoy said police are on the lookout for a white sedan.

During the incident, two people held open a door at the store near Mount Vernon Square so that four others could enter, Savoy said. One of the shoplifters brought a fire extinguisher into the store and discharged it to distract employees and allow the thieves to take merchandise, Savoy said.

The value of the merchandise taken could not be learned.

- Martin Weil

VIRGINIA

Officer fatally shoots woman in Strasburg

An officer fatally shot a woman in Strasburg on Sunday night, Virginia State Police said. Authorities have opened an investigation.

Virginia State Police said the Shenandoah County Emergency Communications Center received a call about 11 p.m. that a person was acting erratically, damaging property and threatening people inside a hotel in Strasburg.

An officer arrived and found a woman in the parking lot of the hotel, police said. An altercation led to the woman attacking the officer, taking his baton and striking him on the head, police said. The officer fired his gun and struck the woman.

The woman was taken to Winchester Medical Center, where she died, police said. Her remains were taken to the medical examiner's office in Manassas for identification and an autopsy.

The officer was taken to a hospital and released after treatment, police said.

- Omari Daniels