Metro
15-year-old wanted in attempted shooting

Jasmine Hilton                Keith L. Alexander                Peter Hermann 
677 words
26 May 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Authorities are searching for a 15-year-old boy who is accused of attempting to fatally shoot another teenager aboard a school bus in Prince George's County this month.

Prince George's County police and the U.S. Marshals Service's Capital Area Regional Fugitive Task Force are offering a combined reward of up to $12,500 for information that leads to the teen's arrest and indictment in the attempted killing of the 14-year-old boy on the bus. The wanted teenager is charged as an adult with attempted first- and second-degree murder and related counts, according to a news release. Police identified him only as "Baby K."

Baby K has also been charged in an unrelated homicide in D.C. on May 3, according to two individuals who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss the ongoing investigation. The victim in the D.C. shooting is the sister of an alleged accomplice in the attempted bus shooting, according to individuals familiar with the investigation.

D.C. police reported one homicide on May 3, that of 23-year-old Kaijah McCoy. Efforts to reach McCoy's family Thursday were unsuccessful.

Police have arrested and charged three other teens as adults in the attempted shooting on May 1: a 14-year-old boy of Suitland, a 15-year-old boy of Temple Hills and a 14-year-old girl of Oxon Hill. They all remain in custody. Each is charged with attempted first- and second-degree murder and related counts, according to prosecutors.

According to a preliminary investigation, police said that the charged teens and the victim knew each other and that "the attempted murder stemmed from a dispute."

In court on Monday, the 14-year-old girl was accused of planning the attack on the bus of the 14-year-old victim, according to prosecutors. She is also charged with conspiracy to commit first-degree murder.

"The tragedy that could have happened on the bus that day was almost unimaginable," Prince George's County State's Attorney Aisha Braveboy (D) said at a news conference Friday morning after the preliminary hearing of the two teenage boys charged in the attempted bus shooting. "That's why we've taken this case seriously … and send a very strong message that this type of behavior will result in tough, stiff consequences here in Prince George's County."

At the hearing, police and prosecutors unveiled more details of how three teens beat and tried to shoot another teen who remained on a school bus after the bus had stopped to drop off students at Iverson Street and Sutler Drive in the Oxon Hill area. There were two adults on or near the bus at the time of the attempted shooting - a bus driver and a bus aide, who were not injured, according to police.

Police obtained video footage from the bus, which showed three people entering the bus, with one pointing a handgun, a Prince George's police detective testified in court. The person with the handgun, who police said is the wanted 15-year-old boy, attempted twice to shoot the boy on the bus in the area of the head to upper chest, but the gun malfunctioned, the detective said.

While the gun malfunctioned, the teens began to beat the boy as he attempted to flee toward the back of the bus, where they followed him and prevented his escape, according to the police detective. The 15-year-old with the gun tried to shoot the boy a third time, and the gun once again malfunctioned.

Police said officers responded about 4:55 p.m. to the reported assault on the bus. The boy had minor injuries, and ammunition was found on the bus, according to police.

A judge found probable cause to continue to hold the two teen boys but dismissed handgun possession charges against them after defense counsel argued there was no evidence for those charges.