Metro
Murder suspect who escaped custody at GWU Hospital last month is captured

Peter Hermann                Tom Jackman                Emily Davies 
605 words
27 October 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B02
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A murder suspect who escaped from D.C. police custody at George Washington University Hospital last month was captured Thursday in Prince George's County, ending a seven-week search across portions of the metropolitan area, police and U.S. Marshals Service officials said. No one was injured in the apprehension.

Police said Christopher Patrick Haynes, 30, was found about 10:30 a.m. on Iverson Street in the county's Oxon Hill area. U.S. Deputy Marshal Robert Dixon said in a news conference that Haynes was taken into custody "without incident." Dixon declined to describe how Haynes was located.

Haynes ran away from the hospital emergency room in D.C.'s Foggy Bottom area while police were attempting to change his handcuffs and failed to secure one of his arms to a gurney, acting D.C. police chief Pamela A. Smith said last month.

Haynes, who lives in Gainesville, Va., assaulted one of the officers and ran out of the hospital in the 900 block of 23rd Street NW, authorities said. At the time, the handcuffs were dangling from his wrist, and he was wearing one red shoe.

After Haynes outran a pursuit, he eluded police and federal authorities, who in the hours after the escape closed roads in the Foggy Bottom and Georgetown areas, sent a helicopter and ordered George Washington University students to shelter in place. Police dressed in fatigues and armed with long guns scoured the campus and its surrounding neighborhoods.

Haynes is charged in the Aug. 12 shooting of Brent Hayward, 33, outside a convenience store on Kenilworth Avenue in Northeast Washington. Deputies with the U.S. Marshals Service's Capital Area Regional Fugitive Task Force took him into custody Sept. 6 in Manassas on a warrant out of D.C. Superior Court, authorities have said.

Police released several photos of Haynes and offered a $25,000 reward for information leading to his capture. They also released a video that appeared to show him in a fenced yard in D.C. soon after his escape from the hospital.

Smith said Haynes frequented several areas in the District and has ties to Prince William, Stafford and Fauquier counties in Virginia. The man he is charged with shooting in D.C. is from Virginia.

Smith said last month that internal affairs detectives were investigating the escape to see if officers followed proper protocols. She said a single officer drove Haynes, who had complained of a preexisting ankle injury while in D.C. police custody, to the hospital.

The police department's general orders say that transportation of a prisoner to a hospital "shall be conducted by two members, unless exigent circumstances exist" and that "security-risk prisoners shall always be transported by two members."

And once at the hospital, the general orders say, officers "shall ensure that at least one arm or leg is secured to a fixed object at all times."

"He has been taking actions to conceal his location, so, yes, he was hiding from us," Don Snyder, commander of the U.S. Marshals regional task force, said at the Thursday news conference.

Police and marshals declined to say where Haynes had been, how he had survived the past seven weeks on the run, or whether anyone will be charged with harboring him.

D.C. police also said in a news release that the department's helicopter was involved in locating Haynes. He will face a federal charge of escape, in addition to the pending murder charge, officials said.