Metro
5 shootings in Md. and D.C. over 1½ hours

Dan Morse                Peter Hermann                Salvador Rizzo 
1,029 words
20 May 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

CORRECTION: A May 20 Metro article about shootings in Maryland and D.C. incorrectly stated the location of a shooting that injured a 14-year-old girl in Prince George’s County. It was in the Riverdale area, not the Riverside area.

An 18-year-old was fatally shot on a rush-hour Metro platform in Montgomery County on Thursday evening as residents and leaders in the area wrestle with the latest spate of gun violence among teenagers and young adults.

"It goes, I think, to the lawlessness of these guys these days," said Montgomery Police Chief Marcus Jones. "This case and what you see in D.C. and Prince George's are sad. These guys have no regard for human life."

Over a 1½-hour stretch, five shootings in the three jurisdictions wounded or killed six people. The victims included a 14-year-old girl who was shot outside an apartment complex in the Riverside area of Prince George's. She remained hospitalized in critical condition Friday. That county's police chief, echoing Jones, lamented how quickly people are to resolve disputes with gunfire.

"We're past the point of things getting out of hand," Prince George's County Police Chief Malik Aziz said.

Violent crime totals in Prince George's are essentially unchanged this year compared with the same period a year ago, according the police department's statistics. Homicides are down (27 compared with 35), while nonfatal shootings are up (104 compared with 98).

In the District, the shooting of 47-year-old Leonard Carter in the Edgewood community brought the number of homicides in D.C. this year to 85, a 10 percent increase from this time last year.

"I said very plainly I'm not satisfied with it, and I want our whole system to be working urgently to drive those crimes down," D.C. Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) said Friday during an appearance on "The Politics Hour" with Kojo Nnamdi.

The incidents began at 5:20 p.m., when assailants drove into a 7-Eleven parking lot along New Hampshire Avenue, about one mile south of the Capital Beltway, officials said. They fired at two men sitting in the parking lot and drove off. One of the victims was taken to a hospital in serious condition and the other received non-life-threatening injuries, according to a police spokesman.

Some 18 minutes later, gunfire that hit the 14-year-old girl erupted five miles away in Prince George's County. Aziz said it appears that multiple guns were fired through vehicles parked outside a building.

Back in Montgomery County, at 5:53 p.m., an altercation broke out between two groups on an escalator at the Wheaton Metro station. It intensified, leading to the shooting of 18-year-old Tenneson Vaughn Leslie Jr. on the platform. He was taken to a hospital where he was pronounced dead.

Responding police searched surrounding areas for assailants who got away.

"It's jarring and understandably heightens everyone's concerns over public safety," Montgomery County Council member Gabe Albornoz (D-At Large) said of the Wheaton shooting. "It was in a very public place. It was during the day. It was so brazen."

Twelve months ago, Albornoz said that youth violence in Montgomery was increasing to a volume he'd never seen before and called the issue "a massive problem with no easy solution."

Albornoz said the numbers have since leveled off, citing efforts by the county's Street Outreach Network, which tries to pull youths from gangs, as well as the county's post-covid restarting of recreation programs. "We continue to double-down on youth harm-reduction programs," he said. "I feel like we have a better handle on things than we did last year."

Thus far this year, Montgomery police have recorded 79 shootings, an increase from the 66 for the same period last year, Jones said. In 20 of the incidents this year, police confirmed a victim had been hit, Jones added.

Investigators are studying Metro video, Jones said. They have spoken with witnesses, but have yet to hear detailed or solid information, including what the groups were arguing about, the chief added.

Thursday evening's shootings ended with two just eight minutes apart in the District. Carter, the 47-year-old, was shot at 6:47 p.m. in the 300 block of Franklin Street NE near a recreation center and south of a college campus. Around 6:55 p.m., police said, a man was shot and critically injured at First and Q streets NW, in Truxton Circle. No other details have been released about either shooting, and no arrests were made.

So far this year, D.C. police have recorded 48 juveniles shot, compared with 24 over the same period a year ago.

The shootings added to a week that claimed six lives in D.C. since Sunday, including a 10-year-old girl riding in a vehicle and a student killed outside his school. The slayings on Mother's Day of 10-year-old Arianna Davis, a fifth-grader, and of Jefferson Perez, a 17-year-old shot Wednesday afternoon in the parking lot of the school he attended, Roosevelt High in Petworth, shocked a city already contending with growing violence.

Police have said Arianna was in a vehicle with her parents and siblings when a stray bullet from a barrage of gunfire struck her in the Mayfair community. Police said that Perez was shot during an altercation and that a firearm was recovered at the scene.

His grandmother, Sonia Ferrufino, said Friday that the family - owing to safety concerns - had migrated from El Salvador to the United States. On Friday, they were making funeral arrangements. "We're in a very rough shape," Ferrufino said.

Ferrufino hoped those responsible will be arrested soon.

"The police have to find them, because they already have clues as to who they are," she said.

Michael Brice-Saddler, Clarence Williams, Jasmine Hilton, Dana Hedgpeth, Magda Jean-Louis and Janay Kingsberry contributed to this report.