Metro
2 killed near Nationals Park lived close to scene

Peter Hermann 
459 words
25 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

D.C. police have identified two people fatally shot Thursday morning near Nationals Park in Southwest Washington as a young man and a 35-year-old woman who lived around the corner from the store where the shooting occurred.

Patricia Harris died at the scene, police said. Tyrone Jacobs, 24, died at a hospital. Two other men were wounded in the 11:45 a.m. shooting in the 1300 block of Half Street SW, near the Greenleaf Recreation Center. Police said one was released and the other remained hospitalized on Friday.

The late morning shooting outside the Friendly Food Market angered local elected officials who said residents had worked hard to tamp down historic violence in the area, resulting in a long period of quiet. Police said they knew of no motive in the shooting, and a white Jeep Cherokee believed to have been used in the drive-by attack was found burned Thursday night in Prince George's County.

The shootings brought the number of people killed in D.C. this year to 267, a 36 percent increase over this time in 2022. Violent crime in the city is up 39 percent.

D.C. Council Member Charles Allen (D-Ward 6) said he talked to many residents on Thursday and did not believe Harris had been targeted. D.C. police have not commented on who if anyone might have been the intended victim. Allen said Harris had two children and was beloved by the community. Efforts to reach her relatives were not successful on Friday.

Jacobs's sister and father said Friday they were not yet ready to talk about the shooting, though they did say he was killed ahead of his son's fifth birthday on Dec. 31. Jacobs, who lived about three blocks from the store, had recently been released from prison after serving time in connection with an armed carjacking in November 2022.

Jacobs's attorney on the case, Todd Baldwin, said his client "talked about being a good father and wanting to be there for his son when he got released." He said Jacobs's mother had died in April last year, "and he went on the wrong track."

In court documents filed ahead of sentencing, Baldwin said Jacobs had grown up in and out of foster care and had an untreated mental illness. Before Jacobs's mother died, Baldwin said in the court filing that his client "was on track towards a successful rehabilitation," with a job and health treatment.

In an interview, Baldwin called Jacobs's death a tragedy.

"He had served his time. He was a good guy. He wanted to be a father for his son."