Metro
Local Digest

378 words
11 September 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Woman, 21, killed in Northeast shooting

A 21-year-old woman was fatally shot Saturday afternoon in Northeast Washington, and police said they have made an arrest in connection with the killing.

The incident occurred at 3:13 p.m. in the 1200 block of Duncan Place NE.

Officers found Jordan Coates with multiple gunshot wounds. She died at a hospital, police said.

As D.C. police were investigating the shooting, there was "a short barricade" incident, police said in a statement.

The suspect, Damion Brown, 24, of Southeast Washington, eventually surrendered and was arrested. Brown has been charged with second-degree murder while armed, police said.

Efforts to find relatives of Coates and Brown were unsuccessful.

No information was available in court records about an attorney for Brown.

In a news release, police said the killing "appears to be domestic in nature."

The D.C. police investigation determined Coates and Brown were either currently or formerly in a "romantic relationship," D.C. police spokeswoman Hannah Glasgow said.

No further details were immediately available.

- Ellie Silverman

and Spencer S. Hsu

Man dies after shooting, car crash

A shooting and car crash in Southeast Washington last week has become a homicide after the victim died, D.C. police said.

Brandon Gant, 23, of Southeast, was found in a vehicle about 3:30 a.m. Wednesday near 18th Street and Minnesota Avenue SE. He was found after the sounds of gunshots and a collision were reported to authorities, police said. Gant was taken to a hospital with severe injuries and died Friday, police said.

No information was available about any suspect or motive. It was not immediately clear whether the victim's injuries were suffered as a result of the shooting or the collision.

- Martin Weil

MARYLAND

Man slain in Prince George's County

A man was shot and killed Friday afternoon in a commercial area near a principal crossroads in the Clinton area of Prince George's County, according to police.

The man was found about 4:20 p.m. near Woodyard Road and Mike Shapiro Drive by officers who went to investigate gunfire, police said.

The site is just east of Branch Avenue and the interchange of Branch and Woodyard.

- Martin Weil