Metro
Four shot, two fatally, in neighborhood near Nationals Park

Peter Hermann 
697 words
22 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A man and a woman were killed and two men were wounded Thursday morning when shots were fired from a carjacked Jeep in a residential neighborhood near Nationals Park, according to D.C. police.

That shooting and at least one other, on Wednesday, added to the District's rising homicide toll, which has spiked by 35 percent so far this year over the same period in 2022. The city's annual body count had already reached its highest level since 1997.

The latest shootings, near the ballpark, occurred about 11:45 a.m. outside a corner store near Half and O streets SW, a block west of South Capitol Street and the stadium.

Paris Lewbel, a police spokesman, said the victims included three men and one woman. He said one person was pronounced dead at the scene. Lewbel said three other people were taken to area hospitals, where one died. Police said the other two victims were critically wounded.

The victims' identities were not immediately made public.

D.C. Police Chief Pamela A. Smith told reporters at the scene that the shooter was inside a white Jeep Grand Cherokee. She said shots were fired as the Jeep turned a corner where the store is located, striking people standing in a group outside.

Smith said the Jeep had been stolen in an armed carjacking Wednesday night. A police report says three men, one armed with a handgun, confronted the driver as he was unlocking the vehicle outside a convenience store in the Manor Park neighborhood of Northwest. Smith said police do not know whether the same people who took the Jeep were also involved in the shooting. Police said they are seeking the vehicle, which has Maryland license plate number 2FD0820.

D.C. Council member Charles Allen (D-Ward 6) said he visited the shooting scene and met with residents. He said the woman who was killed was a mother with two children who was beloved in the area.

"The whole neighborhood is reeling," Allen said. "I don't believe by any stretch that she was targeted. As I was walking around hugging and talking to people, everybody knew her. There were a lot of tears."

Police said they are in the early stages of the investigation and could not say if any of the victims were intended targets.

The area where the shooting occurred has in the past experienced violence and warring street crews operating in the low-slung, garden-style apartment complexes that contrast with the high-rise condo buildings in the gentrifying area of the ballpark. It is near the same spot where, in 2021, a shooting wounded three people outside the ballpark during a game, sending fans racing for cover and prompting a Nationals game to be suspended.

Allen said efforts by police and residents have tamped down shootings, and Smith confirmed that there had been no serious violence in that area in the past month.

"It was a lot of people doing a lot of hard work," Allen said. He called the overall surge in violent crime in the city this year "devastating" and "infuriating."

Fredrica "Rikki" Kramer, who chairs the area's Advisory Neighborhood Commission, said residents are now asking: "Beyond the horror, what can this community do about this? We don't have a very good answer to that."

Meanwhile, on Wednesday evening, police said a 65-year-old man was found fatally shot inside a residence in the Fairlawn area of Southeast Washington. Officers were called about 6:40 p.m. to the residence in the 2300 block of S Street SE.

Authorities identified the victim as Lance Anthony Holmes of Southeast. Police did not describe his connection to the residence.

Mark Holmes, 62, said he did not know whether his brother lived at the residence on S Street. He said Lance Holmes worked as a traveling barber.

Mark Holmes, who lives in Maryland, said he was waiting to hear details from police detectives and did not want to comment further. No arrest had been made Thursday, and police did not comment on a possible motive.