Metro
3 plead guilty in gun-trafficking case; U.S. says weapons found in Md., N.J.

Salvador Rizzo 
589 words
23 September 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B06
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Three men conspired for months to buy guns under false owners' names at Virginia firearms retailers in 2020 and 2021, and some of the weapons they purchased later turned up at crime scenes or investigations in Maryland and New Jersey, federal authorities say.

The straw purchasers, who pleaded guilty this week in U.S. District Court in Alexandria, admitted to taking part in a conspiracy to make false statements on federal firearms forms. Authorities said they lived in the same building in Towson, Md., for a time and acknowledged that they would send gun-and-ammunition shopping lists to one another via text messages.

Agents from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives said the investigation started with a report from a Fairfax County gun shop, Vienna Arsenal, that has since closed, about Stanley Davis, 24, of Petersburg, Va.

Prosecutors said in court documents that eight of the firearms Davis had purchased at that shop and at Dance's Sporting Goods in Colonial Heights, Va., "were subsequently recovered by law enforcement officers," but only three of them were in Davis's possession. When he bought the guns, Davis had attested on federal firearms registration forms that he would be the owner, prosecutors said.

In one text message, Jasiri Wynn, 23, of Mount Holly, N.J., sent Davis a list of items: "Cz 75 compact silver trigger / M&p / 3 boxes of 9mm bullets /1 box of hollows / 30 round clip for Glock 40." The same day, Davis bought, and filled out an ATF registration form under his own name for, "a CZ USA 75, 9mm pistol," the plea documents say.

According to court records, Baltimore County police later recovered a 9mm pistol with the same serial number "from a juvenile who was with Wynn's brother at the time of the recovery." Another gun Davis purchased was recovered by police in Camden, N.J., "from an individual who was prohibited from possessing firearms," and a third gun Davis bought was found "during an armed robbery investigation involving Wynn's brother" in Frostburg, Md., in 2021, authorities said.

Mantriel Reaves, 25, of Chandler, Ariz., admitted he also purchased guns and made false statements on ATF forms as part of the conspiracy, prosecutors said.

U.S. District Judge T.S. Ellis III scheduled sentencing hearings for Davis and Reaves for Jan. 19, and Jan. 26 for Wynn. They could be sentenced to five years in prison, but their penalties are likely to be lower because none has a prior criminal record.

"Enforcing the federal requirements for legal firearm ownership is one of the ways we prevent violent crime," U.S. Attorney Jessica D. Aber, whose office prosecuted the three men, said in a statement. "As evidenced in this case, straw purchased firearms frequently end up in the hands of convicted felons and at crime scenes. The requirements outlined on ATF firearm purchase forms are there to protect citizens from individuals who seek to use firearms to further illegal activity."

Lawyers for Reaves and Davis did not respond to requests for comment. An attorney for Wynn declined to comment.

Davis's public defenders, Cadence Mertz and Valencia Roberts, had argued unsuccessfully that the indictment against him should be dismissed because of the Supreme Court's ruling in New York State Rifle & Pistol Association v. Bruen , a landmark 2022 decision that struck down handgun licensing requirements in New York and other states.