Metro
Crime lab can operate again

Justin Wm. Moyer 
581 words
28 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

D.C.'s long-troubled crime lab has won back a key accreditation two years after losing it, officials said this week, an important step in recovering from a scandal that cast doubt on the integrity of criminal convictions in the city.

In 2021, the District's crime lab, run by its Department of Forensic Sciences, had to halt examinations of evidence collected during criminal investigations after its accreditation was suspended by a national board. An independent panel of forensic experts concluded, among other concerns, that the lab made an error in testing ballistics evidence in two 2015 homicide cases and then refused to acknowledge the mistake.

The results of the suspension were dramatic. The District lost its ability to use forensic evidence from the lab in court prosecutions - including DNA analyses, firearms and rape kits - and had to contract with private companies to perform these services.

Months after the accreditation was lost, Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) announced that the city would undertake a sweeping review of criminal convictions dating back a decade after a report found breakdowns in leadership, training and oversight throughout DFS.

On Tuesday, however, officials announced that two DFS forensic science units had won back accreditation from the ANSI National Accreditation Board, permitting the department to resolve a backlog of cases and hire essential experts and staff.

The District is enduring an ongoing crime wave, including the highest number of homicides seen in more than two decades.

In a statement Tuesday, Bowser said officials "remain focused on reducing crime, and that means ensuring all parts of our public safety and justice ecosystem are working at full capacity."

"Reaccreditation is a critical step in supporting case closure and affording us another tool to advance justice for victims," the statement said.

Lindsey Appiah, the deputy mayor for public safety, said in an interview that the accreditation of the crime lab will help expedite investigations and bring swifter justice.

Appiah said the biggest advantage is allowing D.C. authorities to again enter forensic information into a national database that can help track offenders and solve open cases. D.C. Police Chief Pamela A. Smith said in an interview, "It's an investigative tool for us."

In a statement, the U.S. attorney's office for D.C., which prosecutes most local felony cases, said the accreditation is "a critical first step in rebuilding the lab."

"Accreditation is an important mile marker in the journey towards having testifying experts again," the statement said. "We look forward to DFS completing the journey in the coming years, and we are prepared to provide whatever support we can in these efforts."

In a statement, D.C. Attorney General Brian L. Schwalb (D) said reaccreditation was "an important first step not only towards full accreditation of the District's crime lab, but also toward ensuring that the District is able to conduct its own high-quality forensic analyses that are admissible in court.

"Ensuring reliable forensic analysis is essential to our prosecutors' ability to effectively bring cases, hold accountable those who cause harm, and provide closure to victims and their families," the statement said.

This is not the first time D.C.'s crime lab has ceased operating. In 2016, after federal prosecutors found errors in cases analyzed by the lab's DNA unit, the lab suspended DNA forensic work for 10 months as new practices were adopted.

Peter Hermann contributed to this report.