Metro
Local Digest

377 words
11 June 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Two people arrested at pipeline protest

Two climate advocates were arrested Friday after chaining themselves to the Wilson Building during a protest demanding that D.C. Council members reject a plan to replace pipelines in the city. The two protesters wrapped chains around their waists and through the door handles of the building and linked arms while wearing shirts that read "Stop Project Pipes." The message was referring to Washington Gas's 40-year program, which launched in 2014, to update the city's 1,200-mile natural gas distribution system.

As D.C. police responded to the incident Friday morning, supporters cheered and chanted "D.C.! Gas free!" according to a video from Extinction Rebellion D.C., the climate group that organized the protest. Supporters also held a pink banner that said "GAS LEAKS, METHANE KILLS."

Makhetha Watson, a D.C. police spokesperson, said the protesters were arrested for crowding, obstructing or incommoding, a D.C. code often cited when arresting protesters during peaceful, planned and coordinated actions of civil disobedience such as the demonstration Friday.

- Ellie Silverman

MARYLAND

1 person killed in Germantown shooting

One person was killed Friday night in a shooting in Montgomery County, the police said.

The fatal shooting occurred in the 19500 block of Gunners Branch Road, in the Germantown area of the county, the police said.

Police on Saturday identified the victim as Errick Roy Dixon, 57. Police gave no description of any suspect or motive.

Gunners Branch Road is a mainly residential street just west of Frederick Road. It curves along a semicircular path that intersects Frederick Road at its northern and southern ends.

- Martin Weil

Man dead after stabbing in Suitland

A man was fatally stabbed Saturday morning in Suitland, Md., according to police in Prince George's County.

Officers investigating a report of a stabbing around 8:28 a.m. found the man with upper-body trauma in a home. He was taken to a hospital, where he died hours later.

The stabbing took place near W Summer Road, police said.

As of 1 p.m., no one had been taken into custody, and the weapon used had not been confirmed, said a police spokeswoman, Cpl. Antonia Washington.

- Heidi Pérez-Moreno