Metro
16-year-old suspected in a string of robberies is charged as an adult

Keith L. Alexander 
674 words
2 September 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B04
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A 16-year-old who was arrested in connection with a string of armed carjackings and robberies in the District was charged as an adult this week, as the U.S. attorney's office appeared to make good on its vow to consider bringing more such juvenile cases to adult court.

The teen, Zakyh Samuel of Southeast Washington, was charged with armed robbery, armed carjacking and possession of a firearm during a crime of violence in connection with two incidents that occurred on Aug. 24 in Northeast and Southeast Washington.

Jeanine Howard, a prosecutor with the city's Office of the Attorney General, revealed the move at a hearing in the teen's juvenile case Thursday, telling Judge Robert A. Salerno that prosecutors in the U.S. attorney's office had decided to prosecute the youth under a law that effectively allows them to charge 16- and 17-year-olds as adults for certain crimes.

The decision came a day after U.S. Attorney Matthew M. Graves announced at an unrelated news conference that he had instructed prosecutors in his office to "strongly consider" charging 16- and 17-year-olds as adults in cases in which they were accused of multiple robberies. Graves said "sprees and patterns are not impetuous crimes of a juvenile who temporarily lost control."

Juveniles are rarely tried as adults in the District, though it is not unheard of. Graves's office similarly charged a 17-year-old as an adult in May with two armed carjackings and related counts.

But the increase in violent crimes in which youths are either the victim or the suspect has forced city officials to think differently. The council recently passed emergency public safety legislation that would expand pretrial detention for juveniles accused of certain crimes. Mayor Muriel E. Bowser had proposed a law that would have gone even further, and she recently announced the city would do targeted enforcement of its juvenile curfew in certain areas.

At the time of Samuel's arrest last week, D.C. police alleged that he was involved in three carjackings in a two-hour span last Wednesday, then a kidnapping and seven robberies within a seven-hour span.

At Samuel's juvenile hearing on Thursday, Salerno inquired about the teen's other 10 cases - including one that the judge said had three co-defendants - that were on his docket. Howard said those cases would also be going to federal prosecutors.

Prosecutors filed a 22-page charging document in D.C. Superior Court in connection with Samuel's arrest, outlining 11 total carjackings and robberies that authorities say they linked to the teen. But in court on Friday, federal prosecutors said they were only charging him in two of the incidents.

When police searched Samuel's home - which his attorney said he shared with his mother and four siblings - they found a Nike sweatshirt and a face mask that police said an attacker could be seen wearing in surveillance videos, according to the charging document. Police also found four guns, and a key fob to a stolen Jeep.

Candace Mitchell, Samuel's public defender, argued the suspect description investigators gleaned from witness accounts and surveillance footage - a person in a black Nike sweatshirt with a white swoosh on the front - was too vague to connect only to her client. Mitchell also argued that witnesses offered contradictory descriptions, with one identifying one of assailants as a female and another identifying an attacker as being over the age of 25.

Authorities said Samuel was in a group of at least three individuals involved in robberies and carjackings. The group, authorities said, used a stolen red Jeep Grand Cherokee to ride up on their victims, and one or two would jump out and either rob them or carjack them.

Magistrate Judge Judith Pipe said there was enough evidence to order Samuel held in D.C. jail until his next hearing Sept. 11.