Metro
Local Digest

352 words
22 April 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

No charges in stabbing of carjacker who died

A bystander who police said intervened and stabbed a man who carjacked a woman last week in Northeast Washington won't be charged with a crime, the U.S. attorney's office for the District said.

A spokeswoman for the U.S. attorney's office would not provide a reason for the decision to decline prosecution. Authorities have not publicly released the man's name.

The suspected carjacker, 29-year-old Devon Jones of Southeast Washington, died shortly after being stabbed, but police have not said whether his death was because of the stab wound or a later car crash.

The incident started about 11 a.m. on April 13 at a gas station in the 1500 block of Kenilworth Avenue NE. Police said Jones was armed with a metal baton and assaulted the female driver. The bystander stabbed Jones during the altercation, police said.

Authorities said Jones managed to pull the woman out of the vehicle and then drive away, crashing into other vehicles a block away. Police said Jones was pronounced dead on the scene.

Efforts to reach the woman who was carjacked and relatives of Jones have not been successful.

- Peter Hermann

Off-duty police sergeant killed in crash

A D.C. police sergeant heading home from an overnight shift at the Fourth District station was killed in a motorcycle crash in Northwest Washington on Friday morning, according to a police spokeswoman.

Authorities identified the officer as Sgt. Jin Park, 32, who had been on the force 11 years. The Fourth District covers areas in Northwest and Northeast Washington that include Fort Totten, Shepherd Park and Petworth.

The police spokeswoman said the crash occurred about 5:45 a.m. at Piney Branch Road and Aspen Street in Northwest Washington's Takoma neighborhood.

Authorities said the crash involved Park's motorcycle and another vehicle.

"It is with a heavy heart that we mourn the loss of an admired and beloved MPD Sergeant," D.C. Police Chief Robert J. Contee III said in a statement.

- Peter Hermann