Metro
Local Digest

505 words
12 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Man, 85, accused of fatally stabbing wife

An 85-year-old man has been arrested on suspicion of fatally stabbing his wife and then wounding himself in an apartment near Logan Circle NW, D.C. police said Monday.

Officers responding to a report of a stabbing arrived at about 3:40 p.m. Sunday at the 1300 block of Corcoran Street NW to find 81-year-old Sharron Hilda Schwartz with injuries and Steven Schwartz with "self-inflicted injuries," police said in a statement. The husband and wife, both of Northwest Washington, were transported to hospitals for treatment, and Sharron Hilda Schwartz died.

Police said that "probable cause was established" based on an on-scene investigation and that Steven Schwartz was arrested and charged with second-degree murder while armed.

- Martin Weil, Laura Meckler

and Omari Daniels

VIRGINIA

Body found after McLean house fire

Police are investigating the death of a man whose body was discovered Monday morning by firefighters responding to a two-alarm fire at a house in McLean, Fairfax County police said.

Fairfax County fire spokeswoman Ashley Hildebrandt said officials received a call at about 9:15 a.m. for a fire in the 4000 block of Ridgeview Circle in McLean. Units arrived to find heavy smoke and fire, Hildebrandt said.

Police said officers responded after firefighters found the man's body in a bedroom. Police are working with fire officials to investigate the circumstances but said the death does not appear to be suspicious and there is no threat to the community. Officials did not release any information about the man.

- Omari Daniels

MARYLAND

1 killed, 1 wounded in Pr. George's, police say

A man was fatally shot Monday afternoon in Prince George's County, police said.

Officers responded at about 12:30 p.m. to the 600 block of Harry S. Truman Drive and found a man with gunshot wounds, police said. He died at the scene.

A second man was shot and taken to a hospital "in stable condition," police said in a statement posted to X.

Police said preliminarily that they do not believe the crime was random.

- Jasmine Hilton

Man fatally shoots son, himself in Pr. George's

A Maryland man is believed to have fatally shot his 2-year-old son before killing himself Sunday in the Largo area, Prince George's County police said.

Police identified the man on Monday as Kenneth Petty, 38, of Suitland, and his child as Sterling Glover Petty, of Frederick.

They were found about 1 p.m. Sunday in a car in the 1200 block of Mercantile Lane, according to police. Each had a gunshot wound. Officers had been called to that location to check on their welfare.

A motive is being investigated, police said.

Efforts to reach the child's relatives on Monday afternoon were unsuccessful.

The site appeared to be in a neighborhood of businesses and offices just west of Landover Road in the Largo area.

- Martin Weil

and Jasmine Hilton