Metro
Hearing is short of a grilling for acting chief

Emily Davies                Peter Hermann 
1,070 words
28 September 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B02
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Acting D.C. police Chief Pamela A. Smith got a relatively warm reception Wednesday from the D.C. Council committee weighing her nomination to be permanent chief, a day after she announced that the District's year-to-date homicide toll had surpassed 200 at the earliest point in a quarter-century.

"I recognize that I have begun my tenure as the District is facing some critical public safety challenges," Smith, who was named acting chief in July, told the council's public safety and judiciary committee in 2 1/2 hours of testimony. "But that also means there is an opportunity to have significant impact in our community and the department."

Committee members did not press Smith on the city's homicide figures, after she said Tuesday that she had ordered a review of open cases in advance of the hearing and found that eight killings had not been included in the department's official count. The addition of those cases pushed the year-to-date total to 209, the highest toll before October in any year since 1997.

Smith offered some insights into how she intends to fight crime. She referred to a new strategic plan; discussed an initiative that shifts resources from across the city to areas struggling with robberies, carjacking and shootings during times when the offenses tend to occur; and called the enforcement of youth curfew "critical."

In her first two months on the job, Smith, a former U.S. Park Police chief, has had to cope with many of the same challenges faced by her recent predecessors: the smallest D.C. police force in decades, a proliferation of firearms on the streets, and a growing number of children shooting and being shot.

Of about 40 community members who testified Wednesday, most supported Smith. Her backers included neighborhood representatives, the local NAACP chapter and the chairman of the D.C. police union. They described her as compassionate and qualified and said they trusted her approach to addressing crime.

"She has the insight, the compassion, she understands the community," said Cora Masters Barry, who runs a sports and education center in Southeast Washington and was married to former D.C. mayor Marion Barry. "But she does not play when it comes to crime."

Gregg Pemberton, the police union chairman, said he supports Smith's confirmation "without reservation."

An ordained minister who has introduced herself as a "pistol-packin' preacher," Smith joined the D.C. police force only 14 months before Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) tapped her for the top job in July, making her the first Black woman to lead the department. Unlike her three predecessors, who had decades of experience policing the District's streets, Smith became acting chief as a stranger to the civic leaders and local activists at the heart of the nation's capital.

Her background is with the U.S. Park Police, where she rose through the ranks and became chief.

Bowser praised her in a statement.

"In her short time leading [D.C. police], Acting Chief Smith has demonstrated she knows policing, understands the partnerships needed to improve public safety, underscored the importance of community engagement, and implemented crime reduction strategies tailored to the needs of our neighborhoods," the mayor said.

Some residents expressed reservation about that relative inexperience with D.C. police, especially given the severity of violence in the District.

Brian Mulholland, a Ward 6 resident, said the District's homicide count this year has made the city "the laughingstock of the nation" and criticized Bowser for appointing Smith.

"She chooses a park ranger when we need a Marine general at war," Mulholland said. Referring to Smith's time as chief of the U.S. Park Police, he added, "We deserve someone who has been in the tough battles, not patrolling picnic baskets."

At one point during the hearing, Smith acknowledged concerns about her background with the Park Police but stressed that she and her officers have the temperament and experience to do the job. In the past 30 days, Smith said, homicides, carjackings and robberies had significantly fallen compared with the 30 days prior.

Smith also said police this month picked up 28 youths for curfew violations - half of whom were taken to the Department of Youth Rehabilitation Services. In a response to a question about the other 14, she said they "are typically reconnected" with their families.

The acting chief also responded to a question about a confrontation with her staff after a particularly deadly stretch in August, when 16 people were shot to death in six days. She was frustrated that too many officers were standing idly instead of patrolling their neighborhoods, and told lieutenants and captains to leave their desks and hit the streets.

"Can you talk about what the reaction has been thus far to those new measures and how that has been implemented since that meeting?" asked council member Brooke Pinto (D-Ward 2), who chairs the public safety and judiciary committee.

"Since that meeting?" Smith said. "I think it's been positive."

Many residents and council members who testified said they had noticed more police officers out of their cruisers and engaging with neighbors since Smith took over the force. At least a dozen people said they had personally met with the acting chief in the past few months. They praised her for consistently showing up at local meetings.

Akosua Ali, the president of the Washington branch of the NAACP, called Smith's résumé "unquestionable."

"Smith has made historic strides toward achieving a more balanced police department," Ali said, "and supporting safer communities with a diverse and inclusive approach to rehabilitation, engagement and mental health."

She added that Smith has "worked to increase opportunities for the recruitment and promotion of Black women" in the force.

The hours-long hearing also included testimony from a handful of faith leaders in Washington, who said they had close relationships with Smith.

"She has heard the cries of the residents, seen their afflictions, and is showing up in the midst of the brokenness," said the Rev. Kendrick Curry, with the Pennsylvania Avenue Baptist Church.

Curry praised Smith for upholding what he called a "tough-on-crime culture," referencing the new enforcement of the juvenile curfew.

The vote on Smith's confirmation as police chief has not yet been scheduled.