Metro
Mother acquitted of assault in court

Tom Jackman 
1,046 words
9 December 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

The guilty verdicts for two D.C. police officers in the death of 20-year-old Karon Hylton-Brown should have been a cathartic moment for his mother amid the tension of a packed D.C. courtroom. Instead, after Karen Hylton blurted out "boom" during the reading of several verdicts, followed by an obscenity, she was forced out of the courtroom and arrested. She spent the night in jail and was later charged with assaulting a federal marshal.

So after a defiant stretch on the witness stand Wednesday, Karen Hylton stepped down and walked past the prosecution table and snarled, "That man killed my baby and you're looking to put ME in jail?"

Hylton, 55, took her misdemeanor assault charge to a jury trial. And on Thursday, after four days of testimony and argument, the jury found her not guilty.

Hylton was accused by Deputy U.S. Marshal Aaron Smith of pushing him in the chest as she was leaving the courtroom. The two told diametrically opposite versions of the 20-second event. The only other witness, another deputy marshal, was on the other side of the courtroom and did not hear what was said, but corroborated Smith's claim that Hylton shoved him, though he placed Smith in a different location.

Smith said Hylton came at him with "a bit of rage in her eyes," then acknowledged he'd never said that in any report or interview. Hylton said she never touched Smith or anyone else and was leaving voluntarily when a group of marshals and security officials grabbed her from behind and hustled her out of the courtroom.

The incident occurred in the courtroom of U.S. District Judge Paul L. Friedman in December 2022, at the pinnacle of a two-year investigation and prosecution of D.C. officers Terence Sutton and Andrew Zabavsky. The officers were members of the 4th District's crime suppression team and had been following Hylton-Brown in connection with an investigation.

The officers pursued Hylton-Brown as he sped on an electric moped through streets and alleys in the Brightwood neighborhood near 16th Street NW in October 2020.

With Sutton's vehicle close behind, dash-cam video showed that Hylton-Brown drove into traffic on 16th Street and was fatally struck by a sport-utility vehicle. Sutton and Zabavsky summoned an ambulance, then left, treating it as a routine accident. Hylton-Brown died soon of head injuries.

The young man's death sparked days of violent protests outside a nearby police station, sometimes led by his mother. Sutton was eventually charged with second-degree murder, and he and Zabavsky, who was driving a separate marked police car, were both charged with conspiracy and obstruction of justice for initially covering up the severity of the crash.

After nearly two months of trial, the jury deliberated five days before returning with its verdict. Karen Hylton said the courtroom had been largely empty for most of the trial but was suddenly packed for the reading of the verdict. She took a seat in the third of four rows, and an audio recording of the verdict being read was played in her trial this week.

After the first "guilty," nothing is heard. But after the second "guilty," Hylton saying "boom!" breaks the silence. Hylton said a courtroom security officer asked her to be quiet. After the third "guilty," another "boom!" from the mother. Hylton said the security officer told her she would have to be quiet or leave. She said she decided to leave to avoid causing a mistrial.

Smith testified that he told the courtroom officer to "please remove her from the courtroom. Before she left the courtroom, she looked right at me, I saw a bit of rage in her eyes, and she pushed me very violently" in the chest. He said the force drove him into the side of a courtroom bench, though another marshal's deputy said Smith was pushed into the marble frame around the courtroom door.

Hylton testified that no one ordered her to leave and that as she was walking toward the door, she heard a fourth verdict and shouted an obscenity over her shoulder. "Someone grabbed me from my back. They just all jumped on me. ... I didn't know what was going on. I didn't cause the disturbance, they caused it."

She said the courtroom recording of her yelling loudly was her response to being suddenly pushed out of the courtroom. A brief segment of surveillance video from the hallway outside the courtroom showed several men pushing her into the hallway.

Hylton said while she was in the vestibule between the courtroom and the hallway, Smith walked up to her and said, "You assaulted me." She said she hadn't seen him or anyone who hustled her out of the courtroom.

"I didn't put my hands on nobody," Hylton said. "No I did not." She noted that she had a purse and coat in her hands and couldn't have pushed Smith in the chest.

Smith said he went to urgent care with chest pain two days after the incident. An X-ray was negative and he was told to take an over-the-counter painkiller.

Hylton remained pugnacious throughout the trial. She told the jury that Smith had been suspended by the Marshals Service, though the judge had told the defense that was not admissible. And when both of the marshal witnesses were asked to identify her in court, a standard moment in criminal trials, she responded with an obscene gesture.

Sutton and Zabavsky have not been sentenced yet as Friedman considers post-trial motions, and Hylton made sure the jury knew the officers, unlike her, have not spent a night in jail.

Alexis Gardner, one of Hylton's attorneys, said after the verdict, "We are relieved that members of our community understood what Ms. Hylton had been saying all along: She did not assault anyone. Instead, she expressed grief after a highly emotional trial involving the murder of her son at the hands of police officers. ... Instead of receiving compassion, Ms. Hylton was arrested and federally prosecuted for vocalizing the pain of losing a child to police brutality."