Metro
Mother in murder case can be released from jail, judge rules

Dan Morse                Laura Meckler 
1,266 words
7 July 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

A Montgomery County woman accused of letting her 79-pound child waste away and die on their living room floor can be released from jail ahead of her trial, a judge ruled Thursday, saying Cynthia Moore would have to abide by strict release conditions.

Moore will be allowed to live with her mother in Washington but was ordered to stay away from the townhouse in Montgomery Village where her child died and where three adult children still live, according to Thursday's hearing.

Moore is set to be tried March 11 on one count of second-degree murder in the 17-year-old's death amid accusations she didn't seek needed medical care for the teen. Authorities allege that Moore, 40, and her husband, Dominique Moore, 45, kept the child and six other minor children in isolated squalor while home-schooling them inside the townhouse.

Circuit Judge Michael J. McAuliffe called the accusations disturbing.

"I have read the allegations in this case, and they send chills down your spine," McAuliffe said. "How someone could treat another human being that way, let alone your own child, is mind-boggling."

But McAuliffe stressed the charges were just allegations, and under Maryland law he couldn't hold a defendant in jail without bond unless they pose an overwhelming risk of flight and public safety threat that cannot be overcome with release conditions.

McAuliffe barred Cynthia Moore from contact with any of her children. The judge ordered her to wear an ankle monitor and leave her mother's home only for legal or medical appointments. Moore also has six surviving minor children - ages 4 to 14 at the time of the 17-year-old's death. They have been placed in foster care, according to court records.

Moore also faces charges of neglect related to her minor children. Dominique Moore faces the same charges as his wife. He remains detained, but his attorneys may seek his release as well.

The debate over Cynthia Moore's detention status represented the latest development in the case that has raised questions about what school systems and social workers can do to monitor home-schooled children.

"Either the system did not work and/or there are blind spots that need to be addressed," Montgomery County Council member Gabe Albornoz (D-At Large) said.

The Moores' home schooling of their children meant they were not exposed to the teachers and school staff who are mandated to report signs of abuse, Albornoz said. He likened their isolation to what all children experienced during the worst of the pandemic shutdowns. Fewer abuse cases were reported then, he said, but abused children who showed up in emergency rooms were more severely injured.

"There were fewer professionals with their eyes on children," Albornoz said.

An attorney recently retained by Dominque Moore, Andre Mahasa, declined to comment. Clare Carlson and Roberto Martinez, attorneys for Cynthia Moore, declined to comment but have said in court filings that the charge of second-degree murder "strains credulity."

The case dates to May 10, 2022, when police and paramedics were called to the Moore house about an unresponsive 17-year-old. The teen was pronounced dead at the scene.

Prosecutors said the child, who identified as male, hadn't been able to move independently for months and had slept on a makeshift bed in the living room. The windows of the home were covered in blankets, its floors were littered with animal feces and the toilets didn't appear to work, police alleged in court filings. All six of the surviving minor children, police said, showed signs of neglect and were removed from the home.

Over the next year, according to police allegations, medical examiners studied the 17-year-old's death, a task made difficult by a dearth of medical records. They ultimately concluded that "the child was not provided adequate care" and died of "complications of neurological disorder." Police arrested the Moores this past spring.

At a court hearing in early June, Cynthia Moore told a judge about medical ailments that she said were not being addressed inside the Montgomery County Correctional Facility.

"I have problems with shortness of breath and problems with my lungs, and I have fluid on my heart," she said, adding that she was having difficulty getting medications. "But they cannot do anything about my heart or my tumors that I have for ovarian cancer, because I have ovarian cancer. They can't do anything about that."

Prosecutors Sheila Bagheri and Lauren Fetsch countered that there was no documentation of her medical problems, and they cited jail records showing Moore was receiving medical attention. They added that the allegations in the current case "involve the defendant improperly self-diagnosing her children with various medical issues and not providing them with any medical attention for many years."

The judge agreed.

"I don't believe anything you said. I don't believe anything," McAuliffe told Moore in court Thursday.

In arguing for her release, Moore's attorneys noted she has no previous arrests and is cooperating with ongoing foster care cases involving her children. Moore has gone to all those proceedings and followed all orders imposed, her attorneys said in court filings.

Albornoz, the county council member, said that from his position on the panel's education and human services committees, he will examine what changes could be made to increase the monitoring of home-schooled children. As of now, he said, the county school system does not appear to have the authority to demand in-person evaluations or observations of home-schooled children.

"It is an area, as a matter of policy, we're going to have to look at," Albornoz said.

Doing so could mean exploring changes to state laws, which he said appear to forbid local school districts to impose rules on how much children of home-school parents can be monitored.

Maryland requires parents to notify their local school district annually if they plan to home-school their children, but other requirements are minimal. The main lobbying organization for home schooling, the Home School Legal Defense Association, considers Maryland a "low-regulation" state.

Home-school parents in Maryland are not required to have any particular qualifications, and no tests or assessments are required. Families are required to either submit a portfolio showing their children's work to district officials or have a private organization review their work. Critics say that oversight by the private organizations, known as umbrella groups, can be virtually nonexistent and that some families ignore the law altogether.

Social service agencies - namely Child Protective Services - would have responsibility over neglected or abused children. But in the Moore case, it is not known whether any complaints were filed or whether CPS was made aware of the situation.

Spokespeople for CPS and the school system have declined to comment specifically on the case, citing the ongoing criminal case and confidentiality rules.

County Council member Will Jawando (D-At Large), who is chair of the education committee, called the Moore case a tragedy and said council members will look into the county's home-school procedures. But he cautioned against overreacting.

"We have a little over 4,000 students being home-schooled," he said. "It's a tried-and-true model. The vast majority of these kids are learning and doing great."

Jawando continued: "We can always do things better and find gaps, but I think it's premature to look into policy changes around home schooling."