Metro
D.C. man arrested in killing of girl, 10

Justin Jouvenal                Emily Davies 
534 words
19 September 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

D.C. police on Monday arrested a man in the killing of Arianna Davis, a 10-year-old girl whose death on Mother's Day has come to symbolize the toll of lethal violence in the nation's capital.

Koran Gregory, 19, of Southeast Washington, was charged with first-degree murder while armed.

Police said they believe Gregory and at least one other person were exchanging gunfire as Arianna's family was driving home from a Mother's Day event in the 3700 block of Hayes Street NE. Police said a stray bullet struck the girl, who was in the back seat of her parents' car. She died at a hospital three days later.

"Arianna and her family were innocent victims caught in the middle of senseless gunfire," acting D.C. police chief Pamela A. Smith said at a Monday news conference. "This has to stop. I've said it over and over and over again. This type of senseless violence has to stop."

Arianna is the youngest of 191 people, including 14 other juveniles, who have been slain so far this year in Washington - a pace of homicides not seen in the District for at least two decades.

Gregory was initially arrested Monday in D.C. on unrelated firearm charges, Assistant Police Chief Carlos Heraud said. Heraud declined to say what might have caused the initial shooting.

"It was shocking to us. It was shocking to the community," he said. "It should be shocking to you all."

Smith said the public provided "key evidence and video" that led to Gregory's arrest and stressed that police are still searching for other potential suspects. There is a $45,000 reward for any information leading to an arrest and conviction in the case. Police asked anyone with tips to call the department at 202-727-9099 or text anonymously at 50411.

Officials in the District, from Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) to U.S. Attorney Matthew M. Graves, have faced mounting pressure this year to stem the violence, as homicides are falling in many big cities but the pace of killings in Washington continues to surge.

The mayor tasked multiple city agencies with working on plans to reduce violence. The D.C. Council passed emergency legislation this summer that makes it easier for judges to detain some people, including juveniles, before trial. And Smith, less than two months into her job, has said that police are now more aggressively investigating incidents in which gunshots are fired but nobody is struck.

Graves previously told The Washington Post that the emergency legislation had already helped authorities detain some people accused of violent crime, but not of using a gun.

Arianna's family has been outspoken about the importance of police finding and arresting her killer. At a vigil after her death, where more than 100 people gathered at RFK Stadium dressed in blue, Arianna's favorite color, her grandfather urged police to be more vigilant when on patrol.

"Get our family some justice," said Everett Douglas, "so they don't do it to anybody else."

Magda Jean-Louis contributed to this report.