Metro
2 infants on D.C.'s list of homicide omissions

Peter Hermann 
1,231 words
29 September 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B01
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

Two were infants, found dead or dying in their D.C. homes, one with obvious signs of trauma.

There was an 88-year-old man who suffered a lethal head injury during an argument.

And another man, 61, was fatally beaten with an eight-foot wooden board.

They are among eight people whose deaths in the District were not immediately included in the police department's official tally of killings this year, despite the D.C. medical examiner's office having ruled each case a homicide.

D.C. police have acknowledged those omissions, which had inadvertently kept the homicide count inaccurate. This week, the department publicly released information on the eight cases, communicating for the first time the victim identities and circumstances in previously uncounted killings - and adding to the city's mounting body count. None of the eight cases has been closed.

With that disclosure, D.C.'s homicide toll - already at its highest point in decades - jumped from 201 to 209. Then it rose again after two people were fatally shot Wednesday night in Northeast Washington. In addition, the death of 45-year-old Maria Lopez, who died in a fire in Northwest Washington in 2022, was classified this week as a homicide.

The year-to-date tally as of midday Thursday stood at 212.

Zina Gray Grimes's 61-year-old brother, Thomas Levi Gray, died after being struck with a board near Capitol Hill in October 2022. His death was not ruled a homicide until this year. Grimes said she had no idea her brother had not been counted among the city's 2023 homicide cases.

Gray "was the comedian of the family," Grimes said, noting that he gave fun nicknames to his six siblings and later had six children of his own. He delivered newspapers with his cousin, and she said he was killed while arguing with a man who had bullied him.

Police said they identified a suspect days after the attack, before Gray died in a hospital, and charged him with assault. Although prosecutors dropped that assault charge, police said they are consulting with the U.S. attorney's office about filing new charges "to reflect the death."

"We live every day in sorrow because this man was walking free," Grimes said of the suspect, adding that learning there could be new charges "means so much to our family. I'm begging them, please file a case."

Marvin Haiman, the police department's chief of staff, said all eight of these homicide cases have been investigated since the deaths occurred. "Our homicide detectives never stopped working," he said.

But Haiman said there sometimes was a lag between a medical examiner's ruling of homicide and when those cases were added to the official list and made public. He said past practice had been to add all the cases by the end of each year.

Acting D.C. police chief Pamela A. Smith now requires new homicide cases to be added to lists immediately upon the medical examiner's ruling.

Smith announced the homicide omissions while speaking to reporters Tuesday night at the scene of the fatal shooting of a high school student in Northwest Washington. That killing attracted increased attention because it was believed to be the city's 200th homicide of 2022, a milestone not reached that early in a year since 1997. As it turns out, the killing was the 208th of the year - and the 209th occurred just hours later.

The pace of killings in the District so far this year is up 38 percent from the same period in 2022.

Smith said the department learned that its running homicide count was inaccurate after she ordered a review of all open homicide cases ahead of her appearance Wednesday before a D.C. Council committee that is weighing her nomination to be permanent chief.

D.C. Council member Brooke Pinto (D-Ward 2), who chairs a committee with oversight on police, said in a statement that "ensuring accurate and expedient communication among our public safety agencies is critical both for public safety and public accountability."

Pinto said that crime data such as homicide counts are "an important measurement that the public has a right to know."

The District's homicide count is posted on the police department's website and is updated every weekday morning.

It is used by city leaders, police, lawmakers and the media to contemplate changes in strategies, write new laws, compare cities, and to judge, fairly or unfairly, the safety of the District. The city's 212 homicides account for 5.3 percent of total violent crime.

But the list is not a simple tally. It counts homicides deemed criminal, leaving out killings ruled justified, such as by self-defense. The list includes people shot or injured in previous years but who died this year. It also includes people who died in previous years, but whose deaths are ruled homicides this year.

Three of the victims just added to D.C.'s 2023 homicide list were injured and died in 2022. Two of the victims were injured in 2017 and 2021, and died this year. Three victims, including the two infants, were injured and died this year.

The cases vary in complexity, but in each, police reports show, the cause or manner of deaths were not immediately evident, and it took awhile for the medical examiner's office to issue rulings.

Six victims were beaten or suffered injuries in altercations, police said. Two were shot.

Police said they found 5-month-old Kenneth Geo Walton unconscious in an apartment in Cathedral Heights on Feb. 11 with injuries described in a police report as "consistent with potential physical abuse." Police said Kenneth died six days later.

On March 16, police said they found 7-month-old King Phelps dead inside a residence in Southeast Washington. A police report said detectives did not observe obvious injuries. Medical examiners later ruled both deaths as homicides by blunt force trauma.

Tyshida Williams, 31, was found dead from an apparent gunshot wound on July 30 inside a residence in Southwest Washington, according to police. A person who called 911 told police the wound had been self-inflicted, and officers found a handgun at the scene, according to a report. After the medical examiner ruled otherwise, police reclassified the case as an active homicide.

Police said 88-year-old Gordon Wilson died nearly two weeks after he was apparently hit in the head inside his residence in Northwest Washington in October 2022. Police said a female resident heard loud noises, a "thump" and a person who appeared to be leaving. Later, police said, Wilson feared he had suffered a concussion and was taken to a hospital. He wound up on life support.

In the other cases, police said, Keith Sistare, 52, was fatally struck by a man trying to stop him from getting into another person's vehicle at a gas station in 2022. They said Antonio Bennett, 30, was found injured on a sidewalk in Northeast Washington in 2021 and died in January. The medical examiner said he had been beaten.

And police said Anthony Smith, 26, was found wounded from gunfire in Northeast Washington in 2017 and died in August this year.

Emily Davies contributed to this report.