Metro
Local Digest

446 words
6 July 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
B03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Police seek suspectsin theft of 2 bulldogs

Police are searching for two French bulldogs stolen at gunpoint in Southwest Washington on Monday, as well as the people suspected of taking them, authorities said Tuesday.

The robbery occurred minutes after an assault on a person and unsuccessful attempt to steal their dog, police said. A D.C. police spokesman said the incidents were believed to be related.

The first of the attacks occurred around 10:28 a.m. Monday, when a suspect approached a person walking her dog at Maine Avenue and 7th Street SW, D.C. police said in a statement.

A police report said the suspect asked to pet the dog, and the person let them do so but began to feel uncomfortable and started walking away. That is when the suspect grabbed her dog's leash and attempted to take it, the report said. When bystanders started shouting at the suspect, the suspect fled, according to the report.

Minutes after this failed attempt, according to police, suspects emerged from a vehicle and approached a person walking two dogs in the unit block of V Street SW - a location less than two miles from the first incident.

A police report said one of the suspects told the person to "give up the dogs," then attacked the person, who fell to the ground. The suspect produced a handgun and threatened to kill the person, the report said, ultimately fleeing with the dogs in a vehicle.

The stolen dogs were said to be French bulldogs, according to police - a male around 18 months old named Uno and a female around 5 months old named Cartier.

Police ask anyone with information about the incident to contact them at 202-727-9099.

- Justin Wm. Moyer

and Samantha Latson

MARYLAND

Fireworks linked

to Rockville house fire

A plastic bag full of discarded fireworks caused a house fire Tuesday night in the Rockville area of Montgomery County, injuring a firefighter, displacing a family and causing $1.25 million in damage, authorities said.

The Montgomery County Fire Department responded at 10:45 p.m. Tuesday to a report of a house fire on the 15000 block of Rosecroft Drive. The occupants said they heard an explosion and found a fire outside their home, authorities said.

The fireworks, which are illegal in Montgomery County and were purchased outside the county, sparked a fire that spread to shrubbery and the large single-family house, according to department spokesman Pete Piringer.

Three adults, a child and their pet escaped the home, authorities said. One firefighter had a medical emergency and was taken to a hospital, Piringer said.

- Omari Daniels