Metro
Local Digest

398 words
21 May 2023
The Washington Post
WP
FINAL
C03
English
Copyright 2023, The Washington Post Co. All Rights Reserved 

THE DISTRICT

Maryland man is

found fatally shot

Police are investigating a fatal shooting that took place Saturday morning in Southeast Washington.

The shooting occurred shortly after 8 a.m. in the 3400 block of Stanton Road SE, D.C. police said.

After responding to reports of gunfire, police found Little Price Jr., 36, of Bladensburg, Md. Price was pronounced dead at the scene.

Before Saturday morning there had been 85 homicides in the District in 2023, a 10 percent increase over the same time last year.

- Peter Jamison

MARYLAND

Man dies in crash on I-270 after police chase

Traffic was stalled on Interstate 270 on Saturday morning after a man died in a crash following a brief police chase.

Around 5 a.m., Montgomery County police officers responded to a call about a car parked in the middle lane of the Rockledge Road ramp. Inside was a man who appeared to be intoxicated and had a gun in his lap, authorities said. He drove away, traveling north on the interstate.

Officers pursued the vehicle, which crashed south of Route 28 on I-270. The driver was ejected from the car and pronounced dead at the scene. Two adults in another vehicle were taken to the hospital with non-life-threatening injuries.

Police have not released the name of the man who died. Maryland State Police and the Maryland Attorney General's Office are investigating the crash.

- Peter Jamison

VIRGINIA

18-year-old arrested

in Woodbridge killing

Police have arrested an 18-year-old Dumfries man they say was responsible for a fatal shooting in Prince William County in November.

The suspect - who was a juvenile at the time of the killing and whose name has not been released - shot 44-year-old Demetrious Levar Graham of Woodbridge on Nov. 12, detectives said. Police responded to reports of shots fired near Morgan Court and Old Triangle Road in Dumfries early that morning and found Graham dead in a vehicle.

Using surveillance footage, Prince William County police identified the suspect, who they said sought out Graham after a dispute at a nearby residence involving a family member. On Thursday - when he visited court on an unrelated matter - the suspect was arrested and charged with murder, use of a firearm in commission of a felony and possession of a firearm by a juvenile.

- Peter Jamison